Interested In
Generalized spin-boson models with non-normalizable form factors
J. Math. Phys.  (July 2022)
Boundary conformal fields and T omita–T akesaki theory
J. Math. Phys.  (November 2003)
Quasi ‐ exactly solvable potentials on the line and orthogonal polynomials
J. Math. Phys.  (August 1996) 04 October 2023 22:57:57
Acceptable solutions of the radial Schr €odinger equation for a particle
in a central potential
J.Etxebarriaa)
Department of Physics, University of the Basque Country, UPV/EHU, Bilbao, Spain
(Received 6 January 2023; accepted 3 June 2023)
We revisit the discussion about the boundary condition at the origin in the Schr €odinger radial
equation for central potentials. We give a transparent and convincing reason for demanding theradial part R(r) of the wave function to be ﬁnite at r¼0, showing that if R(0) diverges the complete
wave function wdoes not satisfy the full Schr €odinger equation. If R(r) is singular, we show that the
corresponding wfollows an equation similar to Schr €odinger’s, but with an additional term
involving the Dirac delta function or its derivatives at the origin. Although, in general,
understanding some of our arguments requires certain knowledge of the theory of distributions, the
important case of a behavior R/1/rnear r¼0, which gives rise to a normalizable w, is especially
simple: The origin of the Dirac delta term is clearly demonstrated by using a slight modiﬁcation of
the usual spherical coordinates. The argument can be easily followed by undergraduate physics
students.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0141536
I. INTRODUCTION
The stationary states of central potentials V(r) are usually
represented by a product of an angular part (spherical har-
monic Ym
l) and a radial part R(r). The latter is calculated as
a solution of the radial equation,
/C0/C22h2
2ld2
dr2þVðrÞþlðlþ1Þ/C22h2
2lr2"#
uðrÞ¼EuðrÞ; (1)
where u(r)¼R(r)r,Eis the energy, lis the mass of the parti-
cle, and lis the azimuthal quantum number. Equation (1)is
solved with the supplementary condition,
uð0Þ¼0: (2)
Although this boundary condition is used virtually in all text-
books on quantum mechanics, there are many different justiﬁ-
cations. In fact, this question is discussed differently indifferent textbooks. For example, Schiff1and Landau and
Lifshitz2use the argument that the wave function must be
ﬁnite at the origin, whereas Powell and Crasemann3suggest
that it is the normalization of the wave function that leads to
Eq.(2). However, the wave function can be normalized even if
it is singular at the origin, i.e., if u(0)6¼0. Grifﬁths4recognizes
the subtlety of this issue and avoids a direct consideration of
the problem. Messiah5deﬁnes the Hermitian radial momen-
tum, and its Hermitian property requires this boundary condi-tion. Another explanation is given by Fl €ugge.6He indicates
thatu(0)6¼0 would lead to a divergent energy integral.
A few years ago, Khelashvili and Nadareishvili7gave a
succinct reason for Eq. (2), making explicit an argument
already outlined by Dirac in his classical book.8According
to these authors, a Dirac delta function term appears in the
radial Schrodinger equation when the Laplace operator iswritten in spherical coordinates,
/C0/C22h2
2lrd2u
dr2þ2p/C22h2
lurðÞdrðÞ
þVrðÞþllþ1ðÞ /C22h2
2lr2"#
urðÞ
r¼EurðÞ
r; (3)which is valid for r/C210. A similar idea was also presented in
Ref. 9.
This additional term had been previously unnoticed in the
literature. It gives a clear explanation for the necessity of
imposing the supplementary condition (2)for solving the
usual radial equation (1).
In this paper, we will see that Eq. (3)is, indeed, correct,
provided that u(0) is ﬁnite , and we will give a very simple
justiﬁcation for it. If u(0) is inﬁnite , the situation is even
more complicated as will be shown at the end of the paper,
and the radial equation contains additional terms involving
derivatives of the Dirac delta. Anyway, we will show that
solutions of Eq. (1)with a ﬁnite u(0)6¼0 do not give rise to
true solutions of the complete Schr €odinger equation. The
argument can be easily understood by physics undergraduate
students. This will be the purpose of Sec. 