IL 01 2023
Electromagnetic induction: How the “flux rule” has
superseded Maxwell's general law 
Giuseppe Giuliani
Am. J. Phys.  91, 278–287 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0138144
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Resilient Communities: From Sustainable to Secure
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 2009)
Multiswarm PSO with supersized swarms - Initial performance study
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2016)
Supersizing Stars 04 October 2023 22:51:15
Electromagnetic induction: How the “flux rule” has superseded
Maxwell’s general law
Giuseppe Giuliania)
Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit /C18a di Pavia, Via Bassi 6, 27100 Pavia, Italy
(Received 30 May 2021; accepted 10 December 2022)
As documented by textbooks, the teaching of electromagnetic induction in university and high school
courses is primarily based on what Feynman labeled as the “ﬂux rule,” downgrading it from the statusof physical law. However, Maxwell derived a “general law of electromagnetic induction” in which the
vector potential plays a fundamental role. A modern reformulation of Maxwell’s law can be easily
obtained by deﬁning the induced electromotive force asÞ
lð~Eþ~vc/C2~BÞ/C1~dl,w h e r e ~vcis the velocity
of the positive charges which, by convention, are the current carriers. Maxwell did not possess a
model for the electric current. Therefore, in his law, he took ~vcto be the velocity of the circuit element
containing the charges. This paper aims to show that the modern reformulation of Maxwell’s lawgoverns electromagnetic induction, and the “ﬂux rule” is not a physical law but only a calculation
shortcut that does not always yield the correct predictions. This paper also tries to understand why
Maxwell’s law has been ignored, and how the “ﬂux rule” has taken root. Finally, a section isdedicated to teaching this modern reformulation of Maxwell’s law in high schools and elementary
physics courses.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0138144
I. INTRODUCTION
Electromagnetic induction was discovered by Michael
Faraday in 1831, about ten years after Christian Ørsted
showed that electric currents create magnetic effects. Faraday
induced currents in a closed conducting loop either by switch-
ing on and off the current in a nearby circuit (volta-electric-induction) or by moving the conducting loop towards or away
from a magnet (magneto-electric-induction).1In textbooks or
classrooms, these experiments are usually the starting point
for a discussion about electromagnetic induction.
Many physicists tackled the problem experimentally and
theoretically in the years following Faraday’s discovery. On
the experimental side, it was not so easy to add novel knowl-
edge to what Faraday had already discovered. An exceptionwas the rule found by Emil Lenz in 1834: the induced cur-
rent opposes the phenomenon that generated it.2
We must wait for Maxwell’s Treatise in 1873 to ﬁnd a gen-
eral law of electromagnetic induction, derived within a ﬁeld
description and by treating the currents with a Lagrangian for-
malism (Ref. 3, pp. 207–211). The amazing feature of this law
is that it was obtained without knowing what an electric cur-
rent is, apart from recognizing that it is a “kinetic process.”
Realizing that an electric current arises from moving
charges, we can reformulate Maxwell’s general law as an
integral around a closed curve l,
E¼þ
l/C0@~A
@tþ~vc/C2~B/C18/C19
/C1~dl; (1)
where ~Bis the external magnetic ﬁeld to which the circuit is
exposed, ~Ais the corresponding vector potential, and ~vcis
the velocity of the positive charges that, by convention, are
the current carriers. Maxwell did not possess a model for the
electric current. Therefore, in his law, he took ~vcto be the
velocity of the circuit element containing the charges.
Maxwell’s law fell rapidly into oblivion; meanwhile, the
“ﬂux rule” took root. The “ﬂux rule” states that the induced
electromotive force ( emf)Eis given byE¼/C0d
dtð
S~B/C1^nd S¼/C0dU
dt; (2)
where Uis the magnetic ﬂux and ^nis the unit vector normal to
the integration surface element dS. There is no constraint on S,
except that it is bounded by the conducting circuit. Maxwellenunciated this rule about 50 pages before the formulation ofthe general law and, regrettably, did not comment on the rela-tionship between the two (Ref. 3,p .1 6 7 ) .T h i sf a c tm a yh a v e
contributed to the oblivion of Maxwell’s law (Sec. VI).
Thereby nowadays, with few exceptions, textbooks for uni-
versity and high school students consider the “ﬂux rule” to bethe law of electromagnetic induction, even though, startingwith Feynman’s Lectures , this view has been challenged.
4
This paper aims to prove that the modern formulation of
Maxwell’s general law (Eq. (1)) explains all known experi-
ments on electromagnetic induction. Furthermore, it exam-
ines why the “ﬂux rule” has superseded Maxwell’s law. It is
organized as follows: Sec. 