Interested In
Reciprocity Calibrations
American Journal of Physics  (October 1957)
Reciprocity assessment of single transducers
J Acoust Soc Am  (September 1993)
General Reciprocity Parameter
J Acoust Soc Am  (July 2005) 04 October 2023 23:02:05
Velocity reciprocity and the relativity principle
Patrick Moylana)
Department of Physics, The Pennsylvania State University, Abington College, Abington, Pennsylvania 19001
(Received 9 February 2021; accepted 19 December 2021)
Velocity reciprocity means that the velocity of an inertial frame Swith respect to another inertial
reference frame S0is the opposite of the velocity of S0with respect to S. While velocity reciprocity
holds true for both the Lorentz and Galilean transformations, it need not be true in general, and it is
a widely held misconception that velocity reciprocity is a sole consequence of the relativity of
motion principle. The situation is, in fact, much more complicated, and it is the purpose of this
paper to call attention to and hopefully help to rectify the matter regarding the misconception. We
show that if we ascribe universal and unrestricted validity to the relativity of motion principle, thenvelocity reciprocity cannot possibly follow only from the relativity principle, and we detail the
additional assumptions that must be made in order for velocity reciprocity to hold.
#2022 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009219
I. INTRODUCTION
The relativity principle demands the equivalence of all
inertial frames as far as the laws of physics are concerned, so
that no experiment can give privileged status to any one ofthem over any other regarding natural law. This is essentially
Poincar /C19e’s formulation of the principle, which, in his own
words, reads: “the relativity of motion principle … [is]…that principle according to which the laws of physical phe-
nomena should be the same, whether for an observer ﬁxed,
or for an observer carried along in a uniform movement oftranslation, so that we have not and could not have any
means of discerning whether or not we are carried along in
such a motion.”
1
There is a long-standing and widespread misconception
among many physicists concerning the relativity principle
and one of its inference velocity reciprocity . In many cases,
including those of the Lorentz and Galilean transformations,velocity reciprocity just amounts to the fact that the inverse
transformation relating a given inertial system Sto another
one S
0is always obtained from the direct transformation
from StoS0simply by replacing the velocity of S0relative to
Sby its negative. However, this need not always be the case,
and it is a misconception that velocity reciprocity is a conse-quence only of the relativity principle. In other words, many
of us incorrectly assume that the relativity principle always
requires that if one is moving relative to someone else with
velocity v, then that other person will be perceived as mov-
ing with velocity /C0vby the ﬁrst person. This misconception
comes from an improper understanding of the relativity prin-ciple and lack of appreciation of its universality. It has not
only found its way into many monographs and articles on
special relativity, including some recent ones in this jour-nal,
2,3but can also be found in some current introductory
physics textbooks.4,5In view of the central role that the rela-
tivity of motion principle plays in physics, we consider aclariﬁcation of the matter to be of some importance.
While velocity reciprocity is easily seen to be true for the
Galilean and Lorentz transformations, we shall show that it
does not always hold true for all situations and for all kine-matics. If velocity reciprocity were a direct consequence
only of the relativity principle, then, assuming universal
validity of the relativity principle, velocity reciprocity wouldalways have to be true. However, velocity reciprocity neednot always be true, even in relativistic theories where the rel-
ativity principle is assumed to hold. Thus, it cannot possiblyfollow solely from the relativity of motion. This is the main
result of this paper. In short, it amounts to whether or not we
follow Poincar /C19e in attributing absolute and universal validity
to the relativity of motion principle as “a general law of
nature …and admit it without restriction.”
6Poincar /C19e seems
to have been the ﬁrst person ever to have insisted on its unre-
stricted and universal validity.1,6–8The misconception con-
cerning velocity reciprocity can, thus, perhaps, at least in
part, be linked to neglect and lack of appreciation of
Poincar /C19e’s important contributions to the relativity principle
and to the theory of relativity.9
Concerning the issue of the validity of velocity reciproc-
ity, it is, in fact, much more complicated than most of us
seem to be aware, and in Sec. 