Interested In
Analysis of Some Recent T ests of Quantum Contextuality
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2010)
Characterization of chromosome morphology of onion cultivars from Southeast Sulawesi
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023)
Strong focusing and the radiofrequency quadrupole accelerator
American Journal of Physics  (February 1996) 04 October 2023 23:18:40
Green’s functions in quantum mechanics courses
William J. Herreraa)and Herbert Vinck-Posada
Departamento de F /C19ısica, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, 111321 Bogot /C19a, Colombia
Shirley G/C19omez P /C19aez
Departamento de F /C19ısica, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, 111321 Bogot /C19a, Colombia and Departamento
de F/C19ısica, Universidad el Bosque, Bogot /C19a 110121, Colombia
(Received 4 August 2021; accepted 2 August 2022)
The use of Green’s functions is valuable when solving problems in electrodynamics, solid-state
physics, and many-body physics. However, its role in quantum mechanics is often limited to the
context of scattering by a central force. This work shows how Green’s functions can be used in
other examples in quantum mechanics courses. In particular, we introduce time-independentGreen’s functions and the Dyson equation to solve problems with an external potential. We
calculate the reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients of scattering by a Dirac delta barrier and the
energy levels and local density of states of the inﬁnite square well potential.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0065733
I. INTRODUCTION
Green’s function method is used to solve problems at the
undergraduate or graduate level. Green’s functions are fre-quently used when solving inhomogeneous differential equa-tions such as Poisson’s equation, the inhomogeneous waveequation, and the inhomogeneous heat equation.
1–7In many-
body physics and solid-state physics, Green’s functions are
introduced to solve more complex problems that require
second quantization.8–16In quantum mechanics courses,
Green’s functions are used in the context of scattering by acentral potential, which requires the understanding of timedependence,
17–21so that Green’s functions are often intro-
duced only in graduate-level courses or speciﬁc problems.22–24
In this work, we show how students in intermediate or
advanced quantum mechanics courses can learn the basicconcepts of Green’s functions and use them to solve prob-lems. First, we present the formalism of Green’s functionsin the context of the Sturm–Liouville problem and linearoperators
25–28and show how we can use it for the time-
independent Schr €odinger equation. Later, we calculate
Green’s function for a free particle and derive the Dysonequation when the system is perturbed with an externalpotential energy function. In particular, we consider a Diracdelta potential, where we can use Green’s function to calcu-late both reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients exactly.
Likewise, we illustrate how to ﬁnd Green’s function of an
inﬁnite square potential well, and from it, the spectrum ofenergy and the local density of states (LDOS). Finally, inAppendix C, we suggest two challenging problems.
