Interested In
Imaging ellipsometry for curved surfaces
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. B  (January 2020)
Analytic solutions for calculating the surface inclination of isotropic media and bare substrates by using
reflection-based generalized ellipsometry
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. B  (April 2020)
Oscillating ‐ analyzer ellipsometer
Rev Sci Instrum  (August 2008) 04 October 2023 23:10:56
Optical measurements on a budget: A 3D-printed ellipsometer
Matthew Mantiaa)and Teresa Bixbyb)
Department of Chemistry, Lewis University, Romeoville, Illinois 60446
(Received 5 February 2021; accepted 13 February 2022)
Ellipsometry is an optical analysis technique that is useful for characterizing the physical properties
of a thin-ﬁlm system. Light reﬂected from a sample surface undergoes a change in polarization dueto phase delay and anisotropic reﬂection. This enables one to perform non-destructive measurements
of ﬁlm thickness, surface roughness, refractive index, and other optical constants. Ellipsometric
techniques are particularly convenient for characterizing coatings or ﬁlms in the semiconductor and
optics industries. However, these techniques may be inaccessible to undergraduate students and
educators due to the prohibitive cost of ellipsometers and similar instrumentation. In response to thisroadblock, we describe the construction of a simple, inexpensive, manually operated, rotating
analyzer ellipsometer (RAE). Required materials include a laser pointer, polarizing ﬁlm,
photometric detector, and a 3D-printed opto-mechanical framework, which are all readily accessibleat most institutions. The instrument’s performance was evaluated by comparing thickness
measurements of tetraethyl orthosilicate ﬁlms to those determined by a commercially available
reﬂectometer. An average ﬁlm thickness difference of 0.77% was measured using the twoinstruments.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009665
I. INTRODUCTION
The increasing availability of new technology often
prompts an inﬂux of low-cost pedagogical supports for edu-cators. A trend in recent years is the acquisition of 3D print-ers by schools, universities, and libraries, allowing forcustom in-house manufacturing of 3D models and scientiﬁcinstrumentation, while providing opportunities for studentsto develop CAD skills. The ability to produce 3D modelsquickly and inexpensively as learning aids has proven usefulin subjects such as anatomy, geoscience, mathematics, pale-ontology, chemistry, and physics.
1The last two ﬁelds are
especially enriched by the construction of instruments ofmoderate complexity. Examples from the Journal of
Chemical Education include a colorimeter,2spectrophotome-
ter,3and Ag/AgCl reference electrodes.4Physics examples
include modular opto-mechanical frameworks, such as forthelCube,5and other custom components inspired by com-
mercial alternatives.6,7However, depending on the quality of
the 3D printer, factors such as print material, dimensionaltolerance, and build volume may limit component designand function. Therefore, any effort to construct an instrument
using 3D-printed components will require balancing cost and
complexity with measurement precision and accuracy.
One application that is relatively underdeveloped by the
3D-printing and Open Education communities is thin-ﬁlmanalysis, which is important for the semiconductor and opti-cal coating industries. Ellipsometry is a technique that usesstraightforward instrument design, construction, and opera-tion to determine the properties of a thin ﬁlm. It resolvessample properties by measuring the change in light polariza-tion following reﬂection from the thin-ﬁlm. One of the leastcomplex ellipsometer designs is the rotating analyzer conﬁg-uration shown in Fig. 1.
A rotating analyzer ellipsometer (RAE) consists of ﬁve
components: light source, polarizer, sample, analyzer (arotatable polarizer), and photometric detector. When linearlypolarized light is reﬂected from a sample surface, it becomeselliptically polarized. The reﬂected light is directed throughan analyzer, and the intensity is measured by a photometricdetector at several analyzer angles. The elliptical polariza-
tion state and the change in polarization can be directlyrelated to the optical properties of the sample system.
This work presents an RAE constructed using 3D-printed
opto-mechanics and readily available optical components,making it suitable for undergraduate or graduate research at asigniﬁcantly lower cost than a commercial instrument. Arobust model of a three-media sample system was developedin an accessible format, Microsoft Excel. This model deter-
mines thin-ﬁlm thickness and refractive index by regression
ﬁtting to the experimental measurements. The accuracy andprecision of the instrument was characterized throughrepeated measurements of ﬁve samples of polished tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) ﬁlms on silicon substrates. TEOS iscommonly used as a dielectric layer in integrated circuit devi-ces. Comparison of TEOS ﬁlm thickness to measurementsfrom a commercial instrument revealed an average differenceof 0.77%, and the average variability in repeat measurementswas found to be 0.03%. This performance is attained at asmall fraction of the cost of a commercial instrument.
