INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| APRIL 01 2023
An economical smoke chamber and light-sheet microscope
system for experiments in fluid dynamics and electrostatics 

Karl D. Stephan  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 316 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0122766
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A dynamic modelling framework towards the solution of reduction in smoking prevalence
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2016)
The factors influencing on consumer preference towards smoke meat
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2022)
Relationship between job and smoking habits based on the CAR T method
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2018) 04 October 2023 22:51:33
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
An economical smoke chamber and light-sheet microscope system
for experiments in fluid dynamics and electrostatics
Karl D. Stephana)
Ingram School of Engineering, Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas 78666
(Received 25 August 2022; accepted 9 January 2023)
A smoke chamber and light-sheet video microscope setup is relatively easy to construct and
provides opportunities for undergraduates to participate in a variety of advanced experiments,
including the demonstration of Brownian motion and the interaction of induced electrostaticdipoles in aerosol particle agglomeration. We present results of these experiments along with
information to allow replication of the setup in undergraduate physics laboratories. A theoretical
model of the rate of aerosol agglomeration of long dipole chains as a function of electric ﬁeldagrees with experiments at ﬁeld strengths up to 200 kV m
/C01.#2023 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0122766
I. INTRODUCTION
Once students have mastered the basics of electromagnetics
and statistical physics, they can tackle more complex interdis-ciplinary experiments that combine familiar concepts withnew ones from more advanced areas of physics. Phenomena
such as Brownian motion and the related concepts of diffusion
and ﬂuid-dynamic drag can be fruitfully studied in a variety ofexperiments ranging from simple video capture of micro-spheres in puriﬁed water
1,2to more complex systems involving
quadrupole ion traps.3While these experiments can be elegant
and pedagogically rewarding, devoting time and resources tobuild a system that allows only one experiment is not alwaysthe best investment. A better approach for laboratories withlimited resources is to develop an experimental hardware base
that can be used to demonstrate an expandable variety of con-
cepts covering a number of topics.
In this paper, we present a system that allows the micro-
scopic study of aerosol particles in a variety of circumstancesthat illustrate concepts in ﬂuid dynamics, electrostatics, andaerosol science. The system uses a “light-sheet” microscope.
4
Originally developed for imaging colloidal particles smallerthan the limiting resolution of an optical system, a light-sheetmicroscope produces a thin, ﬂat beam of light perpendicular tothe line of sight of the imaging objective. Objects in the sheet’svolume appear as bright spots against a dark background, and
the resulting high-contrast images are easily processed by
automated imaging software. After the original concept wasdescribed in the early 1900s, some of the earliest aerosol-science research into the nature and concentration of smokeparticles used the light-sheet technique.
5We have developed asimpliﬁed form of this setup that can demonstrate a wide vari-
ety of phenomena in the areas of ﬂuid dynamics, electrostatics,and aerosol science.
The most costly item in the setup is a video-equipped micro-
scope. Many of the system’s other components can be fabricatedfrom scratch if necessary or procured from hardware stores. Thegenesis of this system came about during COVID-19, when myuniversity shut down all on-campus lab-based research and stu-dent involvement for the better part of 2020, and I set up a smalllaboratory at my house to pursue some ideas on my own in aero-sol interactions with electric ﬁelds. By necessity, no studentswere involved at the time. However, the fact that the systemwas built by one person (except for the occasional assistance ofmy wife) with almost no immediate outlay of signiﬁcant fundsindicates that it should be easy to duplicate elsewhere. Theequipment needed should be found in any reasonably well-equipped undergraduate physics lab: a microscope equippedwith a video recording system, some simple optics, and anoptional high-voltage power supply and vacuum pump.
With the aid of free image-analysis software, students can
perform experiments demonstrating Brownian motion andthe agglomeration of smoke particles in electric ﬁelds,among others.
Following a description of the hardware setup, we
describe these experiments and provide samples of experi-mental results.
