IONAL PHYSICS| MARCH 01 2023
Particle-in-cell method for plasmas in the one-dimensional
electrostatic limit 
Sara Gomez  
 ; Jaime Humberto Hoyos ; Juan Alejandro V aldivia
Am. J. Phys.  91, 225–234 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0135515 04 October 2023 22:50:24
COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS
The Computational Physics Section publishes articles that help students and instructors learn about the com-
putational tools used in contemporary research. Interested authors are encouraged to send a proposal to theeditors of the Section, Jan Tobochnik (jant@kzoo.edu) or Harvey Gould (hgould@clarku.edu). Summarize
the physics and the algorithm you wish to discuss and how the material would be accessible to advanced
undergraduates or beginning graduate students.
Particle-in-cell method for plasmas in the one-dimensional electrostatic
limit
Sara Gomeza)
Escuela de Ciencias Aplicadas e Ingenier /C19ıa, Universidad EAFIT, Medell /C19ın, Colombia
Jaime Humberto Hoyos
Facultad de Ciencias B /C19asicas, Universidad de Medell /C19ın, Medell /C19ın, Colombia
Juan Alejandro Valdivia
Depto. de F /C19ısica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile
(Received 11 October 2022; accepted 21 November 2022)
We discuss the particle-in-cell (PIC) method, which is one of the most widely used approaches for
the kinetic description of plasmas. The positions and velocities of the charged particles take
continuous values in phase space, and spatial macroscopic quantities, such as the charge densityand self-generated electric ﬁelds, are calculated at discrete spatial points of a grid. We discuss the
computer implementation of the PIC method for one-dimensional plasmas in the electrostatic
regime and discuss a desktop application (PlasmAPP), which includes the implementation ofdifferent numerical and interpolation methods and diagnostics in a graphical user interface. To
illustrate its functionality, the electron-electron two-stream instability is discussed. Readers can use
PlasmAPP to explore advanced numerical methods and simulate different phenomena of interest.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0135515
I. INTRODUCTION
The study of plasmas by analytical methods alone is not
sufﬁcient.1,2In many situations, plasmas can be consid-
ered to be collisionless, particularly in space and astro-
physical environments, where short-range binary
interactions can be neglected.3An approach that uses the
collisionless approximation is the particle-in-cell (PIC)
method, which was proposed in the 1950s and has become
widely used due to the great advances in computing power.
The method was developed by John Dawson and Oscar
Buneman and was ﬁrst applied to systems of 100–1000
particles.4The method was extended by Dawson5in 1983.
In 1988, Hockney and Eastwood published a highly
acclaimed book,6and in 1991, Birdsall and Langdon pub-
lished the most widely recognized book on the method.1
Both books describe the PIC method and discuss differentsimulations and analyses.
Simulations are widely used to study different kinds of
microinstabilities and waves common in space plasmas such
as the electron-electron two-stream instability,7Buneman
instability,8and ion-acoustic waves.9There are now open
source programs such as Jupyter notebooks for educationalplasma simulations10and the graphical user interface devel-
oped by Omura and Matsumoto.11
Reference 12discusses the implementation of the two-
dimensional electrostatic PIC method in detail. Although two
dimensions yield a more realistic view of plasmas, thecomputational cost and the complexity of the simulations are
much greater than one dimension. As will be seen in Sec. 