Interested In
The characteristics of polytropic magnetic refrigeration cycles
Journal of Applied Physics  (August 1991)
Flying through polytropes
Am. J. Phys.  (March 2016)
Two Quantum Polytropic Cycles
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2002) 04 October 2023 22:53:50
Simple realization of the polytropic process with a finite-sized reservoir
Yu-Han Maa)
Department of Physics, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China and Graduate School of China
Academy of Engineering Physics, No. 10 Xibeiwang East Road, Haidian District, Beijing 100193, China
(Received 19 June 2022; accepted 23 April 2023)
In most thermodynamics textbooks, polytropic processes are introduced by deﬁning the process
equation rather than explaining their physical origin. In this paper, we propose a simple model to
realize a polytropic process for an ideal gas. The ideal gas is compressed or expanded quasi-statically while in thermal contact with a ﬁnite reservoir with constant heat capacity, and the entire
system is thermally isolated from the outside environment. We propose an experimental
implementation of our model with realistic parameters.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0104382
I. INTRODUCTION
In thermodynamics textbooks, polytropic processes (where
PVn¼constant) are usually introduced as generalizations of
isothermal and adiabatic processes. The polytropic process is
frequently used to model practical engineering thermodynamic
systems, such as compressors.1After studying the isothermal
process equation PV¼constant and the adiabatic process
equation PVc¼constant, it is easy for students to accept that
there may be practical processes with PVn¼constant. Here, P
andVare the gas pressure and gas volume, respectively, cis
the adiabatic exponent or heat capacity ratio, and nis the poly-
tropic exponent.
However, apart from the equation PVn¼constant used to
deﬁne the polytropic process, students are usually provided
with little or no understanding of the origin of such a pro-
cess. It is well known that an isothermal process can be
achieved by quasi-statically expanding or compressing the
ideal gas when it is in contact with a constant-temperature
heat reservoir. When we quasi-statically compress or expand
the thermally isolated ideal gas, the transformation is adia-
batic. With these two typical reversible processes2in mind,
it is, therefore, natural for one to ask what kind of realistic
thermodynamic process can be described by the polytropic
process equation.
In this paper, a simple model is proposed to realize and
interpret the polytropic process physically. We also discuss
the ﬁnite-size effect of the thermal reservoir implied by this
model.
