Interested In
Dark Energy and the Entropy of the Observable Universe
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2010)
The apparent (gravitational) horizon in cosmology
Am. J. Phys.  (August 2018)
Symmetries of cosmological Cauchy horizons with exceptional orbits
J. Math. Phys.  (May 1985) 04 October 2023 22:55:34
Cosmological horizons
Michele Re Fiorentina)
Department of Applied Science and Technology, Polytechnic University of Turin, Turin 10129, Italy
Stefano Re Fiorentinb)
(Received 24 September 2022; accepted 13 June 2023)
The recently unveiled deep-ﬁeld images from the James Webb Space Telescope have renewed
interest in what we can and cannot see of the universe. Answering these questions requires
understanding the so-called “cosmological horizons” and the “Hubble sphere.” Here, we review the
topic of cosmological horizons in a form that university physics teachers can use in their lessons,using the latest data about the so-called standard “Lambda cold dark matter” ( KCDM) model.
Graphical representations are plotted in terms of both conformal and proper coordinates as an aid
to understand the propagation of light in the expanding universe at various epochs.
#2023 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0127840
I. INTRODUCTION
Amber Straughn, an astrophysicist at NASA’s Goddard Space
Flight Center in Maryland, said during the live event of presenta-tion of the ﬁrst James Webb’s images:
1“Today, for the ﬁrst
time, we’re seeing brand new stars that were previously
completely hidden from our view.” This might suggest that with
technological evolution we will be able to see virtually every-thing in the universe. In general, this statement should be under-stood as limited to the so-called observable universe , bounded
by the particle horizon .E v e nw i t h i nt h eo b s e r v a b l eu n i v e r s e ,
two questions can be asked: (i) Is it possible to observe galaxiesthat, due to the expansion of the universe, were receding atsuperluminal speeds when they emitted their light? (ii) Waiting
even for inﬁnite time, will it be possible in the future to see the
entire universe? Answers to these questions require the knowl-edge of the so-called cosmological horizons , a topic that has
already been the subject of several publications. The ﬁrst com-
prehensive one, aimed at providing a clear deﬁnition and repre-sentation of horizons is Rindler’s 1956 paper,
2which
summarizes all previous works on the subject. However, it is
obsolete today. Another noteworthy article is by Edward
Harrison,3which, however, was written in 1991, well before the
discovery of the accelerated expansion of the universe. The ﬁrsteducational article devoted to the topic of cosmological horizons
belongs to the same period (1993) and was published in this
same journal
4by George Francis Rayner Ellis and Tony
Rothman. The treatment, however, was limited to a matter-onlyuniverse, which is no longer acceptable today. More recent and
up-to-date works on the topic are those by Margalef-Bentabol,
Margalef-Bentabol, and Cepa
5,6and that by Faraoni in Chapter
3o f Cosmological and Black Hole Apparent Horizons .7
However, none of these references provide calculations of the
horizons with the current parameters of the KC D Mm o d e l .T h i s
literature, therefore, cannot be used directly to calculate the pathof photons emitted from different sources in the expanding uni-
verse and to evaluate how these sources are located with respect
to the horizons. It is worth mentioning that there have also beenpublications aimed at correcting misconceptions on the topic,such as the seminal ones by Davis
8–10which, however, do not
include a comprehensive treatment of cosmological horizons.
We will give, here, a didactic presentation of cosmological
horizons in the case of a ﬂat universe, in view of the fact thatexperimental evidence has shown that our universe does notdeviate appreciably from ﬂatness.
11The presentation is
intended as a support for academics who want to teach thetopic of cosmological horizons in introductory courses onrelativity or cosmology. Since all the formulas for the vari-
ous quantities under consideration are derived in the text,
students could draw the graphs themselves or devise newones, using tools such as
MATHEMATICA . Sections 