Interested In
Micromagnetic simulations of sweep-rate dependent coercivity in perpendicular recording media
J. Appl. Phys.  (June 2012)
Numerical anomalies in the Rayleigh–Ritz method for calculating the normal mode vibrations of arbitrarily
shaped elastic solids
J Acoust Soc Am  (May 1995)
On the performance of four-component relativistic density functional theory: Spectroscopic constants and
dipole moments of the diatomics HX and XY (X,Y=F , Cl, Br , and I)
J. Chem. Phys.  (May 2003) 04 October 2023 22:58:16
COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS
The Computational Physics Section publishes articles that help students and instructors learn about the com-
putational tools used in contemporary research. Interested authors are encouraged to send a proposal to theeditors of the Section, Jan Tobochnik (jant@kzoo.edu) or Harvey Gould (hgould@clarku.edu). Summarize
the physics and the algorithm you wish to discuss and how the material would be accessible to advanced
undergraduates or beginning graduate students.
On numerical solutions of the time-dependent Schr €odinger equation
Wytse van Dijka)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4M1;
and Redeemer University, Ancaster, Ontario, Canada L9K 1J4
(Received 10 February 2023; accepted 29 May 2023)
We review an explicit approach to obtaining numerical solutions of the Schr €odinger equation that
is conceptionally straightforward and capable of signiﬁcant accuracy and efﬁciency. The method
and its efﬁcacy are illustrated with several examples. Because of its explicit nature, the algorithm
can be readily extended to systems with a higher number of spatial dimensions. We show that themethod also generalizes the staggered-time approach of Visscher and allows for the accurate
calculation of the real and imaginary parts of the wave function separately.
#2023 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0159866
I. INTRODUCTION
The time-dependent Schr €odinger equation can be written as
i/C22h@
@t/C0H/C18/C19
wðr;tÞ¼0; (1)
with
wðr;t0Þ¼/ðrÞ: (2)
HðrÞis the time-independent Hamiltonian operator,
H¼/C0/C22h2
2mr2þUðrÞ; (3)
where /C22his the Planck constant, mis the mass of the particle,
andUðrÞis the potential energy. The solution of Eq. (1)has
the initial wave function at time t0as input. We can show
that
wðr;tþDtÞ¼e/C0iHDt=/C22hwðr;tÞ (4)
satisﬁes Eq. (1)for any Dt. The solutions of Eq. (1)describe
a large variety of nonrelativistic atomic and subatomic sys-
tems. Usually, a limited number of closed-form solutions arediscussed, but these are few and often describe approxima-
tions of physical systems. Although these solutions provide
valuable insight, we need to solve the Schr €odinger equation
numerically to determine accurate wave functions or to
make predictions of experimentally accessible data.
A variety of numerical methods for treating the time
behavior are based on approximations of the time-evolutionoperator e
/C0iHDt=/C22h. The simplest way to proceed is to consider
the ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion of this operator, which leads
to the forward Euler method,wðr;tþDtÞ¼ð 1/C0iHDt=/C22hÞwðr;tÞþOð DtÞ2hi
: (5)
A successful and accurate approximation is one by Tal-Ezer
and Kosloff,1which expands the time-evolution operator in
terms of Chebyshev polynomials.
Another effective approach is the exponential split-
operator approach (see, for example, Ref. 2) in which the
kinetic and potential energy operators in the exponent areseparated. This separation becomes cumbersome for higherorders because the operators do not commute. TheCrank–Nicolson method
3and its generalization4preserve
normalization, but the method is implicit, which makes itcomputationally less efﬁcient. Although explicit methodsexpress the later-time wave function in terms of an operatoracting on the earlier time one(s), implicit methods requirelinear systems of equations involving the earlier and laterwave functions to be solved.
The simple forward Euler method in Eq. (5)has stability
issues. To overcome this problem, Askar and Cakmak
5sug-
gested calculating the wave function in terms of the wave
functions at two earlier times by combining Eq. (4)with
wðr;t/C0DtÞ¼eiHDt=/C22hwðr;tÞ; (6)
to obtain
wðr;tþDtÞ¼wðr;t/C0DtÞ/C0 eiHDt=/C22h/C0e/C0iHDt=/C22hðÞ wðr;tÞ
(7a)
¼wðr;t/C0DtÞ/C02iDtH
/C22hwðr;tÞþOð DtÞ3hi
:
(7b)
The possibility of stability is ensured,5,6and as an added
beneﬁt, the order of the error has gone from O½ðDtÞ2/C138to
O½ðDtÞ3/C138, as can be seen by expanding the exponentials in
826 Am. J. Phys. 91(10), October 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 826 04 October 2023 22:58:16
Eq.(7a) in a Taylor series. An important, and potentially
useful property of the solution is that the normalization andenergy integrals are also approximately conserved,
ð
w
/C3ðr;tÞAwðr;tÞdV¼constant ; (8)
whereA¼ IorH, and Iis the identity operator.
The goal of this paper is to discuss an expansion of the
time-evolution operator that leads to a simple explicitmethod with potentially signiﬁcant and systematic improve-ments. We introduce the expansion of the time-evolution
operator in Sec. 