ICS| JULY 01 2022
Is the equivalence principle useful for understanding general
relativity? 
Peter C. Aichelburg
Am. J. Phys.  90, 538–548 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0010106
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
WETT : Evaluating T eaching T ools and Methodologies
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2009)
Radiation from a superluminal source
American Journal of Physics  (November 1997)
On the mode stability of a self-similar wave map
J. Math. Phys.  (April 2008) 04 October 2023 23:12:49
ADVANCED TOPICS SECTION
The Advanced Topics Section is meant for articles that deal with physics more advanced than is typical of
regular articles in AJP. Though advanced, these articles have been judged to give clear presentations of
material useful to a segment of AJP readers.
Is the equivalence principle useful for understanding general relativity?
Peter C. Aichelburga)
Faculty of Physics, University of Vienna, Boltzmanngasse 5, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
(Received 28 November 2020; accepted 15 March 2022)
The equivalence principle (EP) is at the heart of general relativity (GR), tested in many aspects. In
discussion, it is often referred to explaining qualitatively the inﬂuence of gravity on physicalphenomena, but is this qualitative approach supported by the theory? We compare clock rates,
frequency shifts, light deﬂection, and time delay in simple static spacetimes to the analogous
phenomena seen by accelerated observers in Minkowski space. In contrast to previous studies, we donot assume that the gravitational ﬁeld is weak and see, as we proceed, how the ﬁeld is constrained by
the EP. Special care is taken that results are only observer-, but not coordinate-dependent. By this, we
clarify some of the issues raised in the literature and show which gravitational effects can and whichcannot be simulated by acceleration. The paper may also serve as a starting point for discussions on the
implications of the EP.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0010106
I. INTRODUCTION
It is well known that Einstein’s “most fortunate thought of
his life”1that a body in free fall is weightless led him to the
idea that gravity is a geometrical property of space and time.
In his paper of 1911, “On the inﬂuence of gravity on the
propagation of light,”2Einstein postulated that a uniform
gravitational ﬁeld is equivalent with regard to all physical
processes to a system in uniform acceleration with respect to
an inertial frame. Later,3he referred to this as the
“equivalence hypothesis,” and it has become known as the
equivalence principle (see comment4). One ﬁnds a discus-
sion of the equivalence principle (EP) in almost all textbooks
on general relativity (GR); see, for example, the study byDwayne Hamilton.
5However, its exact formulation, inter-
pretation, and usefulness for understanding physical phe-
nomena in the presence of gravity is still under debate.6–10
Noteworthy is a very skeptical comment by Synge.11There
exist a number of different formulations of the principle andefforts to classify and relate them, see, for example, Di
Casola et al.
12and references therein. For an analysis of the
EP in quantum mechanics, see Giulini.13
The aim of the present paper is not to contribute to this debate
but to stick to Einstein’s original version of 1911 and discuss itsrole for understanding GR not only on a qualitative level butalso to explore some of its mathematical consequences. The EPis often used for a pedagogical introduction to GR. That relativerates of clocks are affected by gravity and the fact that gravityalso inﬂuences the propagation and the frequency of light can
be inferred qualitatively by making use of it. Einstein himself,
in the cited paper, applied the EP to derive the redshift formulaand to obtain an expression for the bending of light passing nearthe sun on the basis of Newtonian gravity. Here, we discusswhether these arguments can be made more precise by makingthe following assumptions:•Gravitation is described by a metric tensor theory. (We do
not require Einstein’s equations to hold, in general, except
when discussing local light bending where the
Schwarzschild spacetime is considered as an example.)
•Test particles, in our case clocks and detectors, movealong time-like geodesics and light rays along null geode-
sics. This assumes that all the internal degrees of freedom
as well as the self-gravitating ﬁeld can be neglected.
•In the absence of gravity, special relativity is valid.
We restrict our discussion to static gravitational ﬁelds and
discuss to which extent the inﬂuence of gravity on clocks
and light rays can be reproduced by going to an appropriateaccelerated, i.e., non-inertial, reference frame in the absence
of gravity. It is generally agreed that the EP can hold strictly
only locally, when tidal forces can be neglected (but see
comments on this issue by Ohanian14). Nevertheless, and in
contrast to most of the articles on the EP, we do not makeuse of a weak ﬁeld approximation, nor do we require, except
for light bending, conﬁnement to small regions of spacetime.
Rather, as we go along, we see how the gravitational ﬁeld
will be restricted in order to match the effects seen by an
accelerated observer in the absence of gravity. Not surpris-ingly, at the end it turns out that if the EP is to be valid with-
out restrictions, the Riemann tensor of spacetime has to
vanish and the gravitational ﬁeld is spurious.
Although most of the calculations presented are elemen-
tary, we make use of differential geometry and assume
spacetime to have a Riemannian structure. The main draw-back in most of the publications dealing with the EP is that
arguments rely on speciﬁc coordinates. Here, we take care
that results are only observer-, but not coordinate-
dependent. This presentation clariﬁes some of the issues
raised in previous papers and also gives a new perspective
that might be useful when addressing the EP and its
consequences.
538 Am. J. Phys. 90(7), July 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 538 04 October 2023 23:12:49
The paper is organized as follows: For the discussed phe-
nomena, we ﬁrst repeat the qualitative argument before turn-ing to its mathematical formulation. In Sec. 