ICS| APRIL 01 2022
Relativistic spin-0 particle in a box: Bound states, wave
packets, and the disappearance of the Klein paradox 
M. Alkhateeb ; A. Matzkin
Am. J. Phys.  90, 297–304 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009408
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Klein’ s paradox
American Journal of Physics  (June 1998)
Motion of a wave packet in the Klein paradox
American Journal of Physics  (November 1999)
Zitterbewegung and the Klein paradox for spin ‐ zero particles
American Journal of Physics  (June 1982) 04 October 2023 23:07:18
ADVANCED TOPICS SECTION
The Advanced Topics Section is meant for articles that deal with physics more advanced than is typical of
regular articles in AJP. Though advanced, these articles have been judged to give clear presentations of
material useful to a segment of AJP readers.
Relativistic spin-0 particle in a box: Bound states, wave packets,
and the disappearance of the Klein paradox
M.Alkhateeba)and A. Matzkinb)
Laboratoire de Physique Th /C19eorique et Mod /C19elisation, CNRS Unit /C19e 8089, CY Cergy Paris Universit /C19e,
95302 Cergy-Pontoise Cedex, France
(Received 19 March 2021; accepted 11 January 2022)
The “particle-in-a-box” problem is investigated for a relativistic particle obeying the Klein–Gordon
equation. To ﬁnd the bound states, the standard methods known from elementary non-relativistic
quantum mechanics can only be employed for “shallow” wells. For deeper wells, when the
conﬁning potentials become supercritical, we show that a method based on a scattering expansionaccounts for Klein tunneling (undamped propagation outside the well) and the Klein paradox
(charge density increase inside the well). We will see that in the inﬁnite well limit, the wave
function outside the well vanishes, and Klein tunneling is suppressed: Quantization is, thus,recovered, similar to the non-relativistic particle in a box. In addition, we show how wave packets
can be constructed semi-analytically from the scattering expansion, accounting for the dynamics of
Klein tunneling in a physically intuitive way.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009408
I. INTRODUCTION
In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the “particle in a
box,” i.e., when the square well potential is extended to inﬁ-
nite depth, is the simplest problem considered in textbooks,
usually in order to introduce the quantization of energy levels.
In contrast, in the ﬁrst quantized relativistic quantum mechan-
ics (RQM), the situation is not so simple, and the problem isunderstandably hardly treated in RQM textbooks. The reason
is that when the potential reaches a sufﬁciently high value, the
energy gap 2 mc
2separating the positive energy solutions
from the negative energy ones is crossed ( mis the rest mass
of the particle). For such potentials, known as “supercritical
potentials,” the wave function does not vanish outside the
well but propagates undamped in the high potential region, a
phenomenon known as Klein tunneling.1,2Indeed, RQM—
although remaining a single-particle formalism—intrinsically
describes a generic quantum state as a superposition of posi-
tive energy solutions (related to particles) and negative energysolutions (related to antiparticles).
Therefore, for relativistic particles, the particle-in-a-box prob-
lem is not suited to introductory courses. For this reason, only
ﬁnite, non-supercritical rectangular potential wells are usually
presented in RQM classes (see, for example, Sec. 9.1 of Ref. 3
for the Dirac equation describing fermions in a square well or
Sec. 1.11 of the textbook4for the Klein–Gordon equation, spin-
0 bosons, in a radial square well). For a Dirac particle in an inﬁ-
nite well, a “bag” model was developed by not introducing an
external potential, but assuming a variable mass taken to beconstant and ﬁnite in a box, but inﬁnite outside;5,6in this way,
Klein tunneling is suppressed, and solutions similar to those
known in the non-relativistic case can be obtained. This method
was recently extended to the Klein–Gordon equation.7In this work, we show that for the Klein–Gordon equation
in a one-dimensional box, it is not necessary to change themass to inﬁnity outside the well in order to conﬁne the parti-cle. To do so, we shall consider multiple scattering expansionsinside the well. Such expansions were recently employed to
investigate relativistic dynamics across supercritical barriers.
8
We will see below that Klein tunneling, which is prominent
for a supercritical potential well sufﬁciently higher than theparticle energy placed inside, disappears as the well’s depth V
is increased. In the inﬁnite-well limit, Klein tunneling is sup-pressed, and the walls of the well become perfectly reﬂective,as in the non-relativistic case.
The relativistic bosonic particle in a box is an interesting
problem because it yields a simple understanding, in the ﬁrstquantized framework, of the charge creation property that isbuilt into the Klein–Gordon equation, extending tools (scatter-ing solutions to simple potentials) usually encountered inintroductory non-relativistic classes. Moreover, as we willshow in this paper, time-dependent wave packets can be easilybuilt from the scattering solutions. This is important becausewave packets allow us to follow in an intuitive way thedynamics of charge creation in a relativistic setting. The phys-ics of charge creation in the presence of supercritical poten-tials is much more transparent for the Klein–Gordon equationthan for the Dirac equation, which needs to rely in the ﬁrst
quantized formulation on hole theory (see Ref. 9for a Dirac
wave packet approach for scattering on a supercritical step).
The paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst recall in Sec.
