Interested In
From Copenhagen to Neo ‐ Copenhagen Interpretation
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2007)
An introduction to QBism with an application to the locality of quantum mechanics
American Journal of Physics  (August 2014)
A progress report on E. C. proposed noise mapping
J Acoust Soc Am  (February 1999) 04 October 2023 23:04:06
Progressive quantum collapse
William J. Mullin
Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003
Asaad R. Sakhel
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Al-Balqa Applied University, Salt 19117, Jordan
Robert J. Ragan
Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse, La Crosse, Wisconsin 54601
(Received 20 January 2021; accepted 23 December 2021)
Instantaneous collapse of the wave function upon measurement of a single particle is one of the
postulates of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. However, what happens when
a many-body system in a macroscopic coherent state is measured one particle at a time? Here, we
consider successive measurements of individual spins from a spin Bose condensate that starts in aSchr €odinger cat state. When the spin measurements are done one particle at a time, the collapse of
the spin condensate is not instantaneous but leads to probabilities for spin measurement that
strongly depend on the previous measurements. What is surprising is that an almost completecollapse occurs in very few measurements. Even in a large system, a single cat component is
emphasized quite quickly in the sequence of measurements. We examine the process by analysis of
a simple two-Fock-state cat, as well as a cat state that has many components. Justiﬁcation is givenfor our theoretical measurement process.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association
of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009255
I. INTRODUCTION
Wave function collapse upon measurement is one of the
tenets of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechan-
ics. This effect is not built into the Schr €odinger equation; it
is assumed in a separate postulate, often called the “von
Neumann reduction hypothesis,”1which states that when a
measurement of a physical quantity, A, is carried out on a
wave function that is a superposition of the eigenfunctions of
A, the wave function instantaneously collapses to one of
those eigenfunctions. Many alternatives to this approach
have been suggested. One possibility is that the Schr €odinger
equation is incomplete; alterations have been suggested2so
that when a massive object (a measuring device) is present,
the equation itself provides the removal of any superposition.
At another extreme is the interpretation by Quantum
Bayesianists,3who say that the wave function is not a real
physical entity; it is simply one’s best guess at the probabil-
ity of any outcome. Different interpretations of quantum
mechanics may interpret “collapse” in different ways or
even avoid the term.
Here, we don’t concern ourselves with these issues of
interpretation. We simply use collapse in the traditional way
to describe the mathematical process of change in the wave
function with measurement. At the moment when a singleparticle is said to be measured, we instantaneously replace
the wavefunction with an eigenfunction of the measured par-
ticle using probabilities calculated from the wavefunction
right before collapse. Yet here, the single particle that is
measured is taken from a coherent many-body state contain-
ing many particles. How does this macroscopic quantum
state collapse as individual particles are measured?
In recent years, there have been several experimental stud-
ies of the effect of measurement on systems of
Bose–Einstein condensates.4,5These include studies showing
how the interference between two Bose condensates6can
arise due to measurements, even if the condensates each startout in Fock states (states with a ﬁxed number of particles in
each condensate) with no pre-established relative phase. In
the case of spin systems, transverse polarization measure-ments were considered on a Fock state composed of an equalnumber of up and down spins
7(that is, unpolarized), in
which the measurements induced a state polarized in some
direction with a transverse component at a random angle inthex–yplane.
In the experiments on measurement of Bose condensates,
the measurement and analysis was carried out one particle at
a time, resulting in a steady process of change to the system
wave function. One remarkable aspect is how few particleshad to be measured for the system wave function to reach itsﬁnal state. Nevertheless, no single measurement was respon-
sible; each one contributes so that one sees a step-by-step
approach of the wave function to its ﬁnal state. Nothing likethis occurs in normal textbook discussions of collapse thatconsider only a single quantum system, so we feel it could
be illuminating to discuss measurement of these systems in a
classroom setting. We have included both some simpliﬁedanalysis that could be used in classroom discussions, as wellas a complete numerical recipe in the supplementary mate-
rial
8that could be used for student projects.
Wigner considered a sequence of measurements in terms
of a series of projectors applied to the wave function;9here,
we use a different approach derived from quantum optics.4
The process we consider has similarities to recently devel-
oped experimental techniques. Serge Haroche won the
Nobel Prize in 2012 for work on Schr €odinger cat states.
These were not condensates as in our case but linear combi-nations of various photon number states. His method
involved sending atoms through a cavity containing the
photon quantum state: “The information acquisition processusing successive atoms captures the progressive collapse ofthe ﬁeld’s wave function. The ﬁeld starts as a coherent state
without a well-deﬁned number of photons, and it ends in a
Fock state.”
10
200 Am. J. Phys. 90(3), March 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 200 04 October 2023 23:04:06
For our quantum analysis, we consider dual Bose conden-
sates, which are a mixture of two different kinds of bosons.
These might be different species of bosons or simply bosons
in two different states; any pair of states into which bosonscan condense will do. We refer to one state as “spin up” and
the other as “spin down,” even if there is no real spin. A
recent experimental example is the mixture of the two hyper-ﬁne states of Rb;
11each of these states actually has a differ-
ent total spin angular momentum. Here, we consider a
simple system composed of a number of identical bosons ina double potential well.
12The “up spin” ( þ) consists of those
bosons in the left well and the “down spin” ( /C0) those in the
right well. In order to construct our cat state, however, weneed the possibility of one boson type converting into theother. For the Rb system, there are electromagnetic spin-ﬂip
methods that allow such a conversion. For the double well
system used here, atoms can quantum tunnel through the bar-rier between the wells. With such tunneling, one might ques-
tion whether the system is “fragmented”
12into two
condensates, or just one. However, as long as the tunnelingis relatively small, we are still able to make a measurement
and clearly detect which well the particle was in; we will call
this a measurement of spin up or spin down in the commontwo-level terminology developed for measurement of a sin-
gle quantum state.
