Interested In
Interception and rendezvous: An intuition-building approach to orbital dynamics
Am. J. Phys.  (June 2021)
The delicate dance of orbital rendezvous
Am. J. Phys.  (August 2019)
Formation algorithms of sequential control for spacecraft rendezvous with low-thrust
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2018) 04 October 2023 22:54:39
Rendezvous revisited: The search for fast-intercept solutions
Eric M. Edlunda)
Department of Physics, SUNY Cortland, Cortland, New York, 13045
(Received 11 April 2022; accepted 1 June 2023)
Orbital interception scenarios typically involve a chaser that is actively maneuvered to encounter
an inertial target and may be undertaken for a variety of purposes, including docking spacecraft orcolliding with an asteroid for planetary defense studies. Viable intercept trajectories are
constrained by the free-fall path of the target and by auxiliary conditions such as the available time
or fuel budget. Whereas a constraint on the time to intercept is central to the (extensively studied)
Lambert problem, a less common but more visually compelling constraint is that of the available
fuel for intercept. This was the basis of a recent study [E. M. Edlund, Am. J. Phys. 89, 559–566
(2021)], which analyzed one of the two families of possible intercept solutions that were identiﬁed.
The second family, studied in more detail here, describes intercepts at all points in the orbit and has
the interesting property that it admits fast-intercept solutions. This work concludes the analysis ofthis problem; it develops a general condition that describes both families of intercepts, presents
representative solutions, and considers the sensitivity of these solutions to errors in the control
parameters.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0095559
I. INTRODUCTION
Long before space travel was considered a possibility,
there was great interest in the intercept problem, ﬁrst madefamous by Lambert in 1761. The Lambert problem, as it isnow known, seeks the velocity of a body given astronomicalmeasurements of its position at two times. The solution
allows the position of the body to be determined at any later
time, thereby providing great predictive capability. Thisproblem spurred seminal developments in celestial mechan-ics and analysis by some of the best minds of the time.
1,2
There is a long and rich history of the literature stemming
from the Lambert problem, which was reinvigorated in the1950s with the development of spaceﬂight. Modern incarna-tions of this problem often have a goal of ﬁnding the thrust
vector that will allow an actively maneuverable craft to inter-
cept an inertial target (meaning a craft on a “free-fall” or“ballistic” path) at a speciﬁc time.
A number of recent articles have focused on interesting
and insight-building problems involving orbital dynamics,including analysis of the Lambert problem using a searchmethod
3and using the Hohman transfer in introductory
physics courses.4An analysis of close-proximity rendezvous
using the Clohesy–Wiltshire equations was presented in Ref.5, a set of multi-thrust methods for achieving escape velocity
from an initially circular orbit was given in Ref. 6, and a
detailed analysis of Kepler’s problem that examines all pos-sible paths between two points in space was provided in Ref.7. Reference 8approached the intercept problem by consid-
ering a constraint of a speciﬁed Dv, which can be thought of
as a constraint on the quantity of available fuel. Therefore, itwas argued that this particular variation is an excellent prob-lem for undergraduate students, because (in contrast to a
constraint on the intercept time) the velocity constraint is
more readily visualized and developed deeper intuition formotion on elliptical trajectories. A simple HTML-Javascriptsimulator was provided to help visualize and gamify thisstudy of orbital dynamics.
While the work of Ref. 5identiﬁed two possible families
of intercept solutions, it analyzed only the ﬁrst family inwhich intercept/rendezvous occurs after an integer number
of chaser orbits. However, the second family of intercept sol-
utions is particularly interesting, because it allows for fast
intercepts that occur before the target has completed a full
orbit. Such fast-intercept maneuvers may be relevant to plan-
etary defense against civilization-threatening asteroids or
comets where a short, but not pre-determined, time may be
of the essence.
9The Planetary Defense Coordination Ofﬁce,
a division within NASA, tracks known threats and develops
mitigation plans.10As part of that effort, NASA’s DART
mission successfully intercepted the asteroid Dimorphos, the
smaller of a double-asteroid pair, on September 26 of 2022
to test deﬂection by kinetic impact.11Other recent develop-
ments in this line of work include space debris collectors12
and an actively maneuvering Russian satellite thought to bea satellite hunter of sorts.13
One can, of course, ﬁnd solutions to the intercept problem
using a “guess-and-check” method, where initial parameters
are guessed, the trajectories are checked (using something
like the HTML-javascript program distributed with Ref. 5),
and then the parameters are iterated until an acceptable solu-
tion is found. This approach is effective but falls short ofwhat is typically expected of a physics analysis in at least
three important ways. First, such calculations necessarily
rely on an external tool to plot the trajectories and, therefore,
outsources the physics analysis to someone else. Second,
guess-and-check solutions typically require many iterations
and are not very efﬁcient, especially if one wants to examine
a wide range of parameters. Third, when a solution is ﬁnally
realized, one has no way of determining whether it is in any
way ideal or optimal. In contrast, an analytic solution
requires greater initial effort, but also rewards with physical
insight and provides great ﬂexibility to efﬁciently explore
parameter dependency and the sensitivity of solutions to
errors.
This paper proceeds with some preliminaries and a recap
of important results in Sec. 