Interested In
Failure analysis of hanger for superheater tube
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 2020)
A note on combined sliding and rolling friction
Am. J. Phys.  (October 2023)
Multiphysics design optimization for aerospace applications: Case study on helicopter loading hanger
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2014) 04 October 2023 22:51:58
Sliding and rolling along circular tracks in a vertical plane
Rod Crossa)
School of Physics, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
(Received 5 July 2022; accepted 18 January 2023)
Objects that slide or roll along curved tracks in a vertical plane are investigated in two separate
experiments. One concerns a smooth metal nut that slides along a semicircular track made fromcoat hanger wire. The other concerns a billiard ball that slides and rolls along a curved track. A
simple theoretical model is provided to account for the results and to extend the discussion to
consider shortest descent times down circular tracks.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0107553
I. INTRODUCTION
The motion of an object restricted to slide or roll along a
curved track or surface in a vertical plane is a common prob-lem in undergraduate physics. The problem is usually solved
analytically by ignoring friction, since analytical solutions
including friction are generally complicated. For example,the path of quickest descent from point A to lower point B is
the well-known brachistochrone curve, a problem ﬁrst solved
by Newton in 1696 who showed that the quickest path isalong a section of a cycloid. However, Ashby et al.
1found
that different paths are required if sliding friction is involved.
Similarly, the motion of a ball in a loop-the-loop experiment
is a standard problem in elementary mechanics and is easilysolved from conservation equations if friction is ignored. In
fact, it has been shown theoretically that the ball will slip in
a loop-the loop experiment2–4and recent experiments by
Mamola and Dittrich5show that the ball can lose up to half
its initial energy in traversing the loop.
Experiments on the effects of sliding friction in these sit-
uations are rare. Most experiments on the brachistochrone
problem are deliberately designed to minimise friction inorder to demonstrate that the path of quickest descent is a
cycloid.6,7To examine the effects of friction, the author set
up two simple experiments. One used coat hanger wire toguide a metal nut around a circular arc in a vertical plane.The other combined rolling and sliding motion of a billiard
ball along a curved track. Results were obtained by ﬁlming
the motion at 300 fps and were compared with numericalcalculations. The experiments provided further insight into
the effects of friction along a curved path, of direct relevance
to both the quickest descent and loop-the-loop problems. Ofparticular relevance is the fact that a transition from astraight to curved path results in a rapid increase in both the
normal reaction force and the friction force and a corre-
sponding decrease in the linear speed along the path.
