Interested In
Investigations Concerning Polarization in Barium T itanate Ceramics
J Acoust Soc Am  (June 2005)
Aharonov-Bohm Ef fect—Quantum Ef fects on Charged Particles in Field-Free Regions
American Journal of Physics  (February 1970)
Darwin and his Mathematical Inspirations
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 2008) 04 October 2023 22:48:58
Concerning classical forces, energies, and potentials for accelerated
point charges
Timothy H. Boyera)
Department of Physics, City College of the City University of New York, New York, New York 10031
(Received 3 April 2022; accepted 14 October 2022)
Although expressions for energy densities involving electric and magnetic ﬁelds are exactly
analogous, their connections to forces and electromagnetic potentials are vastly different. Forelectrostatic situations, changes in the electric energy can be related directly to electric forces and to
the electrostatic potential. In contrast, discussions of magnetic forces and energy changes involve
two fundamentally different situations. For charged particles moving with constant velocities, thechanges in both electric and magnetic ﬁeld energies are provided by the external forces that keep the
particles’ velocities constant; there are no Faraday acceleration electric ﬁelds in this situation.
However, for particles that change speed, the changes in magnetic energy density are related to
acceleration-dependent Faraday electric ﬁelds. Current undergraduate and graduate textbooks deal
only with highly symmetric situations, where the Faraday electric ﬁelds are easily calculated from
the time-changing magnetic ﬂux. However, in situations that lack high symmetry, such as themagnetic Aharonov–Bohm situation, the back (Faraday) acceleration electric ﬁelds of point charges
may seem unfamiliar. In this article, we present a simple unsymmetric example and analyze it using
the Darwin Lagrangian. In allcases involving changing velocities of the current carriers, it is the
work done by the back (Faraday) acceleration electric ﬁelds that balances the magnetic energy
changes.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0094457
I. INTRODUCTION
The expression E2=ð8pÞfor the energy density associated
with electric ﬁelds is exactly analogous to the energy density
B2=ð8pÞfor magnetic ﬁelds. However, the connections
between the energy expressions and the forces exerted by the
ﬁelds are vastly different in the electric and magnetic cases.
The work done by electrostatic forces leads directly to changes
in electric ﬁeld energy. On the other hand, magnetic ﬁelds do
no work, so the association between changes in magnetic
energy and work is more subtle. In the quasistatic regime, elec-
tricﬁeld energies depend only upon the relative positions of
charges, whereas magnetic ﬁeld energies depend upon both the
relative positions of charges and also their velocities . Current
electromagnetism textbooks discuss quasistatic magneticenergy changes for only two situations: (1) charges that move
with constant speed and (2) charges which change their speed
but are in highly symmetric conﬁgurations. This limited per-
spective leaves out magnetic energy changes for situations that
lack high symmetry. Here, we present a simple point-charge
example lacking high symmetry, which illustrates the connec-
tions between forces, energies, and potentials in quasistatic
classical electrodynamics when radiation ﬁelds are excluded.
Reference to an analogy may clarify the purpose of the pre-
sent article. Magnetostatics, like electrostatics, involves only
two of Maxwell’s equations: r/C1B¼0a n d r/C2B¼ð4p=cÞJ.
However, if one considers only situations of high symmetry,
then one can apply only Ampere’s law and ignore the diver-
gence requirement for B.T h u s ,i fac u r r e n td e n s i t y JðrÞhas
axial symmetry, Ampere’s law plus symmetry is sufﬁcient to
determine the magnetic ﬁeld B, without any need for the diver-
gence equation. However, these highly symmetric situations
give a limited and false impression of the theory. When the situ-ation lacks high symmetry, then the Biot–Savart law must be
used to determine B. The Biot–Savart law is a particular solu-
tion requiring both Maxwell equations for Band may be com-
plemented by a solution of the homogeneous equations.Similarly, highly symmetric situations involving axial symmetry
give the impression that Faraday’s law r/C2E¼/C0 ð 1=cÞ@B=@t
can be used without the need for the rest of Maxwell’s equa-tions, because the confounding terms are suppressed by the sym-metry. Once again, the symmetric situations give only a limitedunderstanding of slowly varying electromagnetic ﬁelds.
With their understanding limited to symmetric situations,
physicists may be unprepared to analyze situations that lack
high symmetry such as the simple example in the present arti-
cle or such as the Aharonov–Bohm situation. Although the azi-muthally symmetric vector potential associated with a circularsolenoid is often treated in junior-level courses in classicalelectromagnetism,
1the experimentally realized situation of the
magnetic Aharonov–Bohm effect (where electrons pass onboth sides of a long solenoid) involves time-dependent interac-tions whose classical electromagnetic aspects are notazimuth-
ally symmetric. It is often claimed in electromagnetism texts
2
and in quantum texts3that there is no classical electromagnetic
interaction of the solenoid back on the passing electrons. Thisclaim is made despite the magnetic energy changes associatedwith the overlap of a passing electron’s magnetic ﬁeld with thesolenoid’s magnetic ﬁeld, which changes depending on theside of the solenoid that the electron passes. Such no-
interaction claims do not take into account the fact that charges
in the solenoid accelerate in response to the passing charge,resulting in Faraday acceleration ﬁelds that are related to thechanges in magnetic energy. Faraday acceleration ﬁelds associ-ated with magnetic energy changes are treated in the presentarticle; further discussion of the Aharonov–Bohm situation ispresented elsewhere.
4
