Interested In
Modeling swimsuits
Physics T oday  (August 2008)
English focus prosody processing and production by Mandarin speakers
J Acoust Soc Am  (October 2017)
Unfolding of a diblock chain and its anomalous dif fusion induced by active particles
J. Chem. Phys.  (April 2019) 04 October 2023 22:59:54
Gravitational lens effect revisited through membrane waves
Stefan Catheline,1,a)Victor Delattre,1Gabrielle Laloy-Borgna,1Fr/C19ederic Faure,2
and Mathias Fink3
1LabTAU, INSERM, Centre L /C19eon B /C19erard, Universit /C19e Lyon 1, Univ Lyon, F-69003, LYON, France
2Institut Fourier, Universit /C19e de Grenoble, Grenoble, France
3Institut Langevin ESPCI, Universit /C19e de Paris, Paris, France
(Received 15 November 2020; accepted 18 September 2021)
By means of experiments and curved manifold simulations, we show that wave propagation past a
topological deviation on a two-dimensional ﬂat fabric membrane is analogous to gravitational
lensing. Using an ultrafast camera, we track a membrane plane wave as it crosses a local warped
depression. Finite difference simulation, based on the scalar wave equation in a Schwarzschildmetric, fully describes the experimental wavefront shape. Comparison between the theoretical and
experimental deviation of wave geodesics from straight lines shows that (i) the nonlinear behavior
of fabrics due to stretching induces second order effects only and (ii) the experimental depressionis closely approximated by the Schwarzschild metric of a gravity well. The experiment
demonstrates, in a simple way, how wave propagation is inﬂuenced by the topology of the
transmission medium.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006612
I. INTRODUCTION
Gravitational lensing was the second experimental valida-
tion of Einstein’s theory of general relativity.1Observations
by Eddington during the solar eclipse of 1919 conﬁrmed pre-dictions of light deviation due to a massive object.2
Numerous other astronomical observations have beenreported since then.3These have all demonstrated that light
waves follow the geodesics of the space-time manifold.4
Previous demonstrations have illustrated these geodesicsusing spheres rolling on a rubber surface.5Although imper-
fect,6the analogy between satellite orbits and the orbits of
balls on a warped rubber membrane provides a beautifuldidactic illustration of gravity from the general relativisticpoint of view. Mechanical waves are also inﬂuenced bygeometry.
7We show that elastic waves on a fabric mem-
brane follow a geodesic: they abandon the straight lines of a
two-dimensional ﬂat surface when a topological scatterersuch as a locally warped depression (akin to a gravity well)is placed in their path. The experimentally observed devia-tions agree well with simulations of light wave propagation
based on the Schwarzschild metric and so constitute a classi-
cal analogy of a gravitational lens in astronomy.
