Interested In
Hyperbolic Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation made rigorous
J. Math. Phys.  (May 2008)
Equivalence of domains for hyperbolic Hubbard-Stratonovich transformations
J. Math. Phys.  (May 201 1)
The Stratonovich formulation of quantum feedback network rules
J. Math. Phys.  (December 2016) 04 October 2023 22:58:22
ADVANCED TOPICS SECTION
The Advanced Topics Section is meant for articles that deal with physics more advanced than is typical of
regular articles in AJP. Though advanced, these articles have been judged to give clear presentations of
material useful to a segment of AJP readers.
Generalized Gaussian integrals with application
to the Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation
Krzysztof Byczuka)and Paweł Jakubczykb)
Institute of Theoretical Physics, Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, ul. Pasteura 5,
PL-02-093 Warszawa, Poland
(Received 2 January 2023; accepted 30 June 2023)
We analyze a variety of Gaussian integrals with the aim of revisiting the derivation of the
Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation as given in standard graduate-level textbooks and provide an
overview of its applications. We pinpoint problematic steps in the usual discussions and propose
careful derivations of the Hubbard–Stratonovich identity pertinent to a variety of situationsrelevant to statistical physics and quantum ﬁeld theory. These derivations are based on direct use of
either a resolution identity or a series expansion. A few homework problems for students are
suggested.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0141045
I. INTRODUCTION
Gaussian integrals are ubiquitous in the analysis of a broad
range of physical systems and are amply discussed in physicstextbooks. However, some care is necessary in their evaluation
in situations where the parameters appearing in the integrand
are not real or complex numbers, but operators or Grassmannnumbers. Such situations arise in particular when performingthe Hubbard–Stratonovich (HS) transformation,
1,2which
counts among the standard tools of theoretical many-body
physics, because it establishes c onnections between micro-
scopic statistical physics models (both quantum and classical)and effective ﬁeld theories in a controllable way. It provides aframework for treatment of a variety of systems at the mean-ﬁeld level and a systematic incorporation of ﬂuctuation effectsboth within and beyond the Gaussian approximation. Despite
its importance, we ﬁnd that a general, detailed, and careful deri-
vation of the transformation, in particular, in the operator cases,is absent in standard academic textbooks.
3–9The purpose of
this note is to provide a thorough discussion of this aspect, cov-ering a range of relevant cases.
In a statistical physics treatment of interacting models, the
Hubbard–Stratonovich transformation is devised to eliminate
an interaction term (below denoted symbolically as b2)f r o m
the partition function. Conceptually, the Hubbard–Stratonovichtransformation relies on the Gaussian integral identity
e
b2=2a¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃa
2prð1
/C01e/C0ða=2Þx2þbxdx; (1)
valid for Re(a)>0. For the presently discussed purposes, it
sufﬁces to consider a2Rþ.
The quantity bmay be represented by different mathemat-
ical objects (numbers, operators, Grassmann variables)depending on the particular problem under study. In the sim-plest situation, bis a real number. For this case, the identityis straightforwardly proven by completing the square of the
argument of the exponential in the integrand
/C0
a
2x2þbx¼/C0a
2x/C0b
a/C18/C192
þb2
2a; (2)
which immediately allows for transforming the integrand on
the right-hand side of Eq. (1)as
eb2=2að1
/C01e/C0ða=2Þx/C0ðb=aÞ ðÞ2dx
¼eb2=2að1/C0b=a
/C01/C0 b=ae/C0ða=2Þy2dy¼eb2=2aﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
ar
: (3)
The generalization to the case b2Cinvolves a contour inte-
gral in the complex plane and a simple application of the res-
idue theorem.10
The actual goal of the transformation is to eliminate the
troublesome quantity b2, which is achieved at the cost of
introducing an integration over an auxiliary variable x,t o
which the dynamical variable blinearly couples.
In numerous relevant situations, the quantity bis, how-
ever, an operator (or other non-numerical object), such that
Eq.(1)becomes
e^B2=2a¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃa
2prð1
/C01e/C0ða=2Þx2^1þ^Bxdx; (4)
where^1is the identity operator. The exponential of an oper-
ator is deﬁned by the series expansion
e^O:¼X1
n¼01
n!^On: (5)
In the context of many-body physics, the quantity ^B2is most
often related to two-body interactions and, for quantum
840 Am. J. Phys. 91(10), October 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 840 04 October 2023 22:58:22
systems, is quartic in creation/annihilation operators (such
that ^Bis quadratic). The identity of Eq. (4)is then used in an
inﬁnite dimensional variant as a functional integral.3–9The
beneﬁt from its application amounts to decoupling the inter-
action such that ^Bappears only in ﬁrst power. This is
achieved in full analogy to Eq. (1)at the cost of introducing
an additional integral, which for the many-body problem is
in fact a multidimensional (functional) integral. In a some-
what loose description, the Hubbard–Stratonovich transfor-
mation allows for rewriting the interacting many-body
problem as a problem of free particles propagating in an
effective external ﬁeld. All admissible conﬁgurations of this
ﬁeld must be taken into account, which is reﬂected by the
presence of the integral.
It is obvious that the simple derivation of Eq. (1)presented
above does not apply to the operator case of Eq. (4), since
after the integration variable shift, the operator ^Bwould
appear in the integration limits, which makes no sense. The
same concerns the case of problems involving fermions,where bmay correspond to a Grassmann variable.
Somewhat surprisingly, for the above operator/Grassmann
cases, we were not able to locate a careful derivation of the
HS identity in the available literature.1–9This fact may pose
an obstacle for lecturers or students in presenting or under-
standing how the HS transformation works in detail. One of
the major purposes of this note is to clarify this point.
We note here that the quantum many-body problem may
be formulated either in the more traditional operator lan-
guage or via the coherent-state path integral.3While intro-
ducing the HS transformation in the former situation one
deals with the necessity of handling operator Gaussian iden-
tities as in Eq. (4). In the latter case, the general expressions
for the partition function and the correlation functions
involve no operators but functional integrals over complex
(for bosons) or Grassmann-valued (for fermions) ﬁelds. As
examples illustrating the HS transformation in the operator
and coherent-state path integral formulations, one may con-
sider the BCS problem analyzed in the operator formalism inRef. 12and the functional integral framework in Ref. 6.
We also point out that, for the majority of quantum many-
body systems, the Hamiltonian comprises an interaction part
^H
I(corresponding to the quantity ^B2above) and a kinetic
contribution ^H0. Since these two typically do not commute,
it is not legitimate to replace e/C0bð^H0þ^HIÞbyeb^H0e/C0b^HI. (Here,
b/C01¼kBT,Tis the temperature, and kBis the Boltzmann
constant.) In evaluation of the partition function using the
operator formalism, a step is required which amounts to
splitting the interval ½0;b/C138into inﬁnitesimal slices. This step
is well described in the literature.12
