Interested In
Drum type ultrasonic dryers
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2022)
Preface to the Special Edition on Femtochemistry and “The Hamburg Conference on Femtochemistry
2015 (FEMT O12)”
Struct Dyn  (August 2016)
Modern semiconductor detectors of ionizing radiation
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2017) 04 October 2023 23:08:36
Simple apparatus for demonstrating factors that influence lift and drag
Leont /C19yna /C20Sl/C19egrov /C19aand Jan /C20Sl/C19egra)
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Hradec Kr /C19alov/C19e, Rokitansk /C19eho 62,
500 02 Hradec Kr /C19alov/C19e, Czechia
(Received 23 August 2020; accepted 16 February 2022)
Although the inaccurate explanation of lift based solely on the Bernoulli equation can still be found
in textbooks, there are many places where interested readers can gain a correct understanding.
However, it is complex and involves several physical phenomena. In this paper, we describe asimple device that can be used in teaching to support the understanding of the correct mechanism
of the generation of lift either during lecture demonstrations or in undergraduate laboratory
measurements.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009681
“It is amazing that today, almost 100 years after
the first flight of the Wright Flyer, groups of
engineers, scientists, pilots, and others can gathertogether and have a spirited debate on how an
airplane wing generates lift. Various explanations
are put forth, and the debate centers on whichexplanation is the most fundamental.”
Professor John D. Anderson on occasion
of the centenary of the Wright brothers’ flight
I. INTRODUCTION
People tried to imitate the ﬂight of the birds from antiq-
uity. Many scientiﬁc observations of birds’ ﬂight were
made by Leonardo da Vinci, as we can tell from his diaries.In 1895, Lord Kelvin famously stated that “heavier-than-
air ﬂying machines are impossible” (although he said this
with respect to the energy efﬁciency of engines availableat the time). Figure 1(a) from the very same year shows
Otto Lilienthal making one of his over 2000 successful
ﬂights. Details of historical development can be found inRef. 1or2.
The concept of the lift was for the ﬁrst time introduced by
Georg Cayley in the early 19th century. Brothers Wilbur and
Orville Wright built a simple wind tunnel in 1901, in whichthey measured over two hundred wing proﬁles. They decidedto use thin, highly cambered airfoils resembling the cross
sections of birds’ wings with the thickness to main chord
ratio of 1:24 in their Wright Flyer (Fig. 1(b); for the deﬁni-
tion of the chord see Fig. 2). From today’s point of view,
they chose incorrect scaling due to lack of understanding of
the Reynolds number and details of airfoil ﬂows, but onDecember 17, 1903, they managed to get the Flyer off the
ground using a 12-horsepower engine in Kitty Hawk, North
Carolina.
Even college textbooks explain lift generation by applying
the Bernoulli equation,
3and the same explanation can be found
in ofﬁcial documents of the Federal Aviation Administration.4
Klaus Niermann analyzed German language textbooks and
found that explanations based on Bernoulli’s law have domi-
nated since the 1920s. He found the same to be true for a sur-
vey of contemporary American and English textbooks.5For
details, see, for example, Ref. 6.
According to the Bernoulli principle, the wing must have
the correct shape with the contour line in the upper part
being longer than the lower contour line. The generation ofthe lift force is then explained with the airﬂow around the
upper part of the wing proﬁle ﬂows at a higher speed
Pþ1
2qv2þqgh¼const :
The ﬁrst term here represents pressure energy, the second rep-
resents kinetic energy per unit volume, and the third repre-
sents potential energy per unit volume, qbeing the density of
the ﬂuid, Pthe pressure, and vthe velocity. The higher speed
of the airﬂow around the upper part of the wing is claimed tobe responsible for lift. In the upper part of the wing, where thevelocity is higher, a lower pressure is generated with respectto the ambient pressure; in the lower part of the proﬁle, thespeed of the ﬂow is lower; thus, there is an overpressure.
This explanation is often referred to as the “theory of the
equal transit times,” because it relies on the assumption thattwo air particles separated on the leading edge of the winghave to meet on the trailing edge. This, however, can be
disproved by timestamped images from a wind tunnel (see
Fig.3). Aside from that there is no enclosing channel around
the wing (as we see in many illustrations of the Bernoulliprinciple), so a relatively large volume of air is affected. Forexample, Waltham
7calculated that Cessna 152, a standard
two-seat trainer, signiﬁcantly affects many tonnes of air persecond at a speed of 30 m /C1s
/C01. With turbulent or transient
ﬂow, the situation is even more complicated.
One source of the more correct (but still simpliﬁed) expla-
nation of lift was presented by Babinski (ﬁrst paper,9extended
version10): Planes ﬂy because they divert air downwards and
receive an upwards lift thanks to Newton’s third law. Asidefrom the asymmetrical shape of the wings that directs the airpassing over them downwards instead of straight behind, thereis one crucial parameter usually overlooked by the equal tran-sit time theory: The angle of attack. Airplane wings areattached at an angle, so they divert the air down, and the air-foil shape lets them do so efﬁciently (more efﬁciently than asimpler shape such as a wing with a rectangular cross sec-
tion). Details can be found in Ref. 7or11.
Lift occurs on bodies because they give air circulation.
This mechanism was discovered more than 100 years ago byNikolay Yegorovich Zhukovsky and Martin WilhelmKutta.
12Circulation means that the air leaves the trailing
edge of the proﬁle at a different angle than it ﬂows to theleading edge. This change in the air’s momentum creates anaerodynamic force; its vertical component is called lift.
359 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 359 04 October 2023 23:08:36
However, the true nature of lift generation is more com-
plex. A recent paper in The Physics Teacher by Doug
McLean13draws attention to the non-uniform velocity and
pressure ﬁelds around the airfoil, which is a consequence ofchanges in ﬂow speed and direction of the air mass.
According to McLean, the cause-and-effect relationship
between pressure and velocity is a reciprocal interaction: Thelifting pressure is a consequence of Newton’s third law; any
upward force on the plane must correspond to a downward
force on the air. However, a combination of Bernoulli’s equa-tion and Newton’s second law explains the path of the air
mass around the wing and its downward diversion that corre-
sponds to the upward force on the wing. There is no “either/or” choice between explanations according to Bernoulli and
explanations according Newton’s third laws, one needs, both
but Bernoulli’s equation must be used correctly.
