INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| APRIL 01 2022
Phase plot of a gravity pendulum acquired via the MEMS
gyroscope and magnetic field sensors of a smartphone 
T. Splith ; A. Kaps ; F. Stallmach
Am. J. Phys.  90, 314–316 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009254
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Modeling and optimizing of the random atomic spin gyroscope drift based on the atomic spin gyroscope
Rev. Sci. Instrum.  (November 2014)
Gyroscopic Motion: Show Me the Forces!
Phys. T each.  (January 2014)
Mathematical model for gyroscope ef fects
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2015) 04 October 2023 23:07:28
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, and
how they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to theIL&D editor for consideration.
Phase plot of a gravity pendulum acquired via the MEMS gyroscope
and magnetic field sensors of a smartphone
T.Splitha)
Center for Teacher Training and School Research, Leipzig University, Prager Straße 38-40, 04317 Leipzig,
Germany
A.Kaps and F . Stallmach
Didactic of Physics, Leipzig University, Linn /C19estraße 5, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
(Received 19 April 2021; accepted 10 December 2021)
A gravity pendulum experiment in which a smartphone serves as pendulum bob and as
measurement device is described. As the pendulum oscillates, the smartphone gyroscope and
magnetometer sensors are used to simultaneously record the bob’s angular velocity and angular
displacement. While the angular velocity is measured directly via the gyroscope sensor, the angulardisplacement is deduced from the change of the magnetometer reading while the smartphone
oscillates in the constant magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth. These two independent measurements enable
us to derive the phase space representation of the pendulum motion directly from experimentaldata. Further data analysis yields energy plots, including the periodic change between the
pendulum’s kinetic and potential energy and the energy dissipation due to friction. Detailed
instructions on how to adopt the experiment, which is both suitable as a lecture demonstrationas well as an instructional laboratory experiment, are provided in the supplementary material.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009254
I. INTRODUCTION
As a supplement to lectures, encouraging students to conduct
experiments using their own smartphones and tablets is a
developing pedagogical technique.1–4For such learning experi-
ences, a number of oscillation experiments have been proposedincorporating smartphones and tablets with their internal digitalsensors as measurement devices.
5–15Harmonic oscillations and
the oscillation equations are a fundamental part of experimental
and theoretical mechanics lectures. However, the representationof the oscillation in phase space, which later in the curriculumis needed for more complex mechanics and electrodynamics
systems,
16,17is an important, but often neglected, concept in
introductory physics courses.
In order to describe the oscillation of a gravity pendulum
in phase space, in which the position is plotted as a functionof the momentum, one needs to measure the angular dis-
placement uand the angular velocity xindependently. If a
smartphone is used as the pendulum bob, both quantitiesmust be detected with its internal sensors. While nearlyevery smartphone has a gyroscope sensor that measures
the angular velocity (for experiments using this sensor, see
Refs. 18–21 ), there are no internal sensors that measure theangular displacement directly and independently of the gyro-
scope. Usually, the smartphone’s acceleration sensor is used
to obtain the orientation of the smartphone relative to Earth’sgravitational ﬁeld. However, in Ref. 22, it is shown that nei-
ther this sensor nor the virtual linear acceleration sensor,
which uses additional information from other sensors, are
suited to obtain the angular displacement in an acceleratedsystem.
We propose measuring angular displacement via the ori-
entation of the smartphone with respect to Earth’s local mag-
netic ﬁeld using the smartphone’s magnetometer. Together
with the pendulum bob’s angular velocity, the phase spacerepresentation of the pendulum can then be obtained.
In this paper, we will present the experimental setup and
analyze the phase plot it produces. A detailed description ofthe setup, experimentation instructions, QR-code that in com-
bination with the phyphox application
1(RTWH Aachen,
Germany) can be used to reproduce the experiment, and step-by-step data analysis is included in the supplementary mate-rial.
23The corresponding results obtained using the linear
accelerometer sensor for the detection of the angular displace-
ment are also included and discussed in the supplementary
material. Furthermore, all data shown in this paper and a
314 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 314 04 October 2023 23:07:28
Jupyter notebook ﬁle that contains the numerical data analysis
are provided.
