Interested In
Green’ s function and image system for the Laplace operator in the prolate spheroidal geometry
AIP Advances  (January 2017)
Magnetic induction of ferromagnetic prolate spheroidal bodies and infinitesimally thin current bands
Journal of Applied Physics  (June 1982)
Using prolate spheroidal magnetization distributions for magnetic modeling
Journal of Applied Physics  (February 1981) 04 October 2023 23:12:29
A novel method of images for solving Laplace’s equation and deriving
demagnetization factors for spheroidal bodies
Anupam Garg,a)J. B. Ketterson,b)and Jinho Limc)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 60208
(Received 15 September 2021; accepted 27 April 2022)
The method of images is applied to ﬁnd the ﬁeld and charge distribution for a conducting prolate
spheroid in a uniform electric ﬁeld via simple one-dimensional integrals. This solution is thenrepurposed to yield the demagnetization factors for a prolate spheroid.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0071665
I. INTRODUCTION
Consider an arbitrarily shaped body that possesses a magneti-
zation (magnetic dipole moment per unit volume), MðrÞ,e i t h e r
spontaneously by virtue of being a ferromagnet or by placementin an external magnetic ﬁeld, H
0. The magnetization of the
body acts as the source of an add itional magnetic ﬁeld H0ðrÞ.
This ﬁeld is often called a demagnetizing ﬁeld, since it usuallyopposes H
0andM, and it is generally nonuniform inside the
body even if MðrÞis uniform or nearly so. A knowledge of the
demagnetizing ﬁeld is essential if one wishes to make accurate
measurements of the magnetic properties of a material. Most
experimental techniques measure the magnetic moment M,
which is the integral of MðrÞover the volume, but ideally one
would like to ﬁnd the relationship between MðrÞand the local
ﬁeldHðrÞ¼H0ðrÞþH0ðrÞ. Finding H0ðrÞcan be challenging,
and its nonuniformity is a further unwelcome complication.Because the magnetic ﬁeld is such an important probe of theproperties of matter and a control variable in many technologi-cal applications, this problem appears frequently across manysubﬁelds of physics and engineering.
The only exception to the nonuniformity of H
0is found
when the body is of ellipsoidal shape and is uniformly mag-netized. In that case, H
0is itself uniform and can be written
in terms of a demagnetization tensor whose trace, further-more, is equal to unity.
1–4Speciﬁcally, in Gaussian units,
H0
i¼/C04pNijMj; (1)
TrN¼Nii¼1: (2)
Here, H0
iandMjare Cartesian components of H0and the mag-
netization, M; repeated indices are implicitly summed over; and
Nijis the aforementioned tensor. It is symmetric, i.e., Nij¼Nji,
and each of its principal values is non-negative.
The above fact is widely known, but while its statement is
very simple, its proof is surprisingly elaborate, and mosttextbooks, even at the graduate level, are content to just statethe fact. The complete solution for the ﬁeld both inside andoutside the body is generally found by solving Laplace’sequation for the magnetic scalar potential in ellipsoidal coor-dinates. Practically, nobody ever goes through this solutionin detail as a student or later in life with the result that even
many experienced researchers do not fully know why the
result is true. Even the degenerate case of a spheroid (anellipsoid of revolution) is quite complicated, and the answersare almost always taken on authority. The more limited prob-lem of ﬁnding just the interior ﬁeld and showing that it isuniform can be solved by starting with Poisson’s integralform for the potential due to the surface magnetic poles,
expanding the inverse separation jr/C0r
0j/C01in spherical har-
monics, and using the orthogonality of these harmonics toperform the requisite surface integral.5While still somewhat
intricate, this method is within the grasp of a graduate class.
The situation simpliﬁes greatly when the spheroid further
degenerates to a sphere, an inﬁnitely long right circular cyl-inder, or an inﬁnitely wide slab. In these three cases, one canobtain the answer by solving Laplace’s equation in sphericalpolar, cylindrical, or Cartesian coordinates, and this is com-monly done in many more textbooks.
6–8In fact, it is not nec-
essary to solve Laplace’s equation at all, and the answer canbe seen to be correct by inspection. Unfortunately, it is notpossible to proceed backward from these simple cases to thespheroid or ellipsoid by guesswork.
It is apparent that because of the underlying connection
with Laplace’s equation, the demagnetization problem hascounterparts in gravity, and it also shares many features withheat transport and elastic stresses in materials with ellipsoi-dal inclusions.
9We have chosen to frame our study in terms
ofdemagnetization since that is where it ﬁnds its most com-
mon application. It is mathematically isomorphic, however,
to the electrostatic problem of depolarization of a dielectric
body in a uniform external electric ﬁeld. The solution of thatproblem can in turn be reduced to that of a conductor in auniform external electric ﬁeld. It is in this last form that weshall present our mathematical analysis, since one can thenappeal to well-known and intuitively simple ideas aboutequipotential surfaces and ﬁelds inside conductors. The con-nection with the magnetic problem is simple and will bemade later.
The most symmetric problem is that of a conducting
spherical shell in a uniform applied electric ﬁeld. In thiscase, the additional ﬁeld produced by the charges induced onthe sphere is precisely that of a point dipole of certainstrength at the center of the sphere. This dipole plays thesame role as an image charge in the method of images—it isto be regarded as a ﬁctitious collection of charges that, alongwith the true charges, makes the surface of the conductor an
equipotential and, thus, produces the correct ﬁeld outside the
conductor, but gives an incorrect ﬁeld inside it. How thisimage dipole is found is beside the point. What matters isthat, however, one has found it, its correctness can be veri-ﬁed. The uniqueness theorem for the solutions to Laplace’sequation when the potential is speciﬁed on a surface (theDirichlet problem) guarantees that the potential will be givencorrectly outside all the conductors. In Purcell’s words,
10the
method provides a “solution in search of a problem.”Starting with an arbitrary collection of charges, one ﬁnds an
520 Am. J. Phys. 90(7), July 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 520 04 October 2023 23:12:29
equipotential surface or a set of such surfaces. Purcell then ima-
gines copperplating one of these mathematical surfaces, takingall the charge inside the mathematical surface and depositing iton the copperplated one instead, and erasing all the ﬁeld linesinside it. The deposited charge is guaranteed to distribute itselfso as to make no change to the ﬁeld lines outside the surface.
In the same way, in this paper, we shall present image
charge distributions that give the solution for a conducting
prolate spheroid (an ellipsoid with semi axes a,b, and b,
with a>b) in a uniform applied electric ﬁeld, both when the
ﬁeld is along the long axis and when it is perpendicular to it.We have found these solutions by guesswork.
We present these solutions in Sec. 