It is capable of diagnostic
imaging of metabolically active areas and organ function and can be used to evaluate blood ﬂow inthe heart muscle, measure bone growth, detect tumors, and perform many other medical studies. It
is a real world application that integrates concepts in medicine, nuclear physics, geometric optics,
data processing, calibration, and image formation. This paper provides an overview of gamma
camera imaging intended for an intermediate-level undergraduate physics course for students
majoring in STEM disciplines. Because working with radioactive materials is not practical in oursetting, we use an approach involving paper-and-pencil exercises, a visible light apparatus, and
computer work.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006168
I. INTRODUCTION
Diagnostic nuclear medicine involves injection of drugs
labeled with radionuclides into the human body. These
drugs, called tracers or radiopharmaceuticals, are chosen forpreferential absorption in speciﬁc target tissues and provideinformation for a wide range of diseases. When the traceremits gamma ( c) rays, they are detected by a gamma camera
(also known as Anger camera), which produces a two-
dimensional image of the three-dimensional spatial distribu-tion of the tracer. The image reveals information about tissuefunction and biological processes underlying disease.Radionuclide imaging laboratories are now found in almostevery hospital in the US.
1More advanced gamma camera
systems, known as single-photon emission computed tomog-
raphy (SPECT), incorporate one or more rotating gammacamera heads to produce a set of planar images that arereconstructed into a three-dimensional image. The mostcommon uses of SPECT are static and dynamic imaging
studies
1to diagnose or monitor disorders of the brain, heart,
bone, thyroid, lung, liver, and abdomen.2Gamma camera
imaging can obtain quantitative information about physio-logical function and the molecular basis of disease withoutperturbing processes within the body.
3Other diagnostic tech-
niques, such as X-rays, computed tomography, and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), show anatomical changes due to
abnormalities.
Gamma camera imaging (GCI) is an important application
of nuclear physics and a major topic in the medical physicscurriculum. However, it is not usually included in the under-graduate physics curriculum. This paper describes how we
have introduced GCI in an intermediate-level physics course
appropriate for undergraduates majoring in science and engi-neering disciplines who have had 1–3.5 years of physicscoursework. By including more applications of physics inthe undergraduate curriculum, we hope to help students
majoring in other disciplines appreciate the importance and
relevance of physics.
Our semester-long course surveys diagnostic and thera-
peutic techniques used in medicine, including eyeglasses,ﬁber optics, ultrasound imaging, computed tomography(CT), positron emission tomography (PET), MRI, in additionto GCI. The portion devoted to nuclear physics, PET and
GCI lasts about four weeks. During that time, we cover
many of the topics found in the nuclear physics chapter of astandard introductory physics textbook. For the portion on
radioactive decay, for example, we relate the half-lives ofradionuclides to medical applications,
14C-dating, nuclear
power, and nuclear weapons. The penetration depth of a,b,
andcradiation through various materials is also discussed.
For most undergraduate programs, the cost of a real
gamma camera is prohibitive, and it is not feasible for a largeclass of untrained students to work with radioactive materi-als. We, therefore, designed several types of apparatus thatuse visible light to model the key physical principles of thegamma camera. For GCI, the level of presentation in Kane
4
is appropriate for our students, but we have enriched the
reading with experimentation, demonstrations, paper-and-
pencil and computer activities, and lectures. Other usefulreferences are Refs. 1and5.
