IONAL PHYSICS| MAY 01 2022
Simulating epidemics via the theory of dynamical systems 

Giorgio Mantica
Am. J. Phys.  90, 380–393 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0082825
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Interventions and their ef ficacy in controlling the spread of an epidemic: A numerical study
Chaos  (March 2022)
Inhomogeneity of epidemic spreading
Chaos  (June 2010)
Resilience of epidemics for SIS model on networks
Chaos  (August 2017) 04 October 2023 23:09:01
COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS
The Computational Physics Section publishes articles that help students and instructors learn about the com-
putational tools used in contemporary research. Interested authors are encouraged to send a proposal to theeditors of the Section, Jan Tobochnik (jant@kzoo.edu) or Harvey Gould (hgould@clarku.edu). Summarize
the physics and the algorithm you wish to discuss and how the material would be accessible to advanced
undergraduates or beginning graduate students.
Simulating epidemics via the theory of dynamical systems
Giorgio Manticaa)
Center for Nonlinear and Complex Systems, Universit /C18a dell’Insubria, Como, Italy
and INFN-Sezione di Milano, INDAM, GNFM, Roma, Italy
(Received 19 December 2021; accepted 19 December 2021)
This paper describes a deterministic dynamical model of the epidemic spreading of disease. We
introduce fundamental concepts from nonlinear dynamics and statistical physics, and use computer
simulations that can be implemented by advanced undergraduate and by graduate students. It is
shown that the model can describe real-world phenomena during an epidemic. Due to its simplicityand ﬂexibility, the model is also a useful tool for research.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0082825
I. INTRODUCTION
The world has been recently caught off-guard by the ines-
capable spreading of disease through human interactions.
Such pervasive spreading was already well known to physi-
cists and mathematicians working in complex systems and
statistical physics and to their scientiﬁc ancestors. Perhaps the
ﬁrst quantitative theory of epidemics was proposed by Daniel
Bernoulli1in 1766 in the form of two differential equations
describing the change in time of the number of susceptible (S)
andrecovered (R) individuals from a disease. This approach
later evolved into the SIR approach ( Irepresents infected )b y
Kermack and McKendrick2in 1927. In these early theories,
individuals are treated in a compartmental (mean-ﬁeld) per-
spective: the total number of people in each category, S,I,
andRare the variables of interest. Although this approach is
still valuable and can predict the evolution of epidemics if
reliable parameters are available (see, e.g., Refs. 3–6for the
present pandemic), it has been recently recognized that social
interactions are typically organized in networks.7,8
More sophisticated models have been introduced in which
people (whether susceptible, infected, or recovered) are
nodes in a network. The transmission of disease is typically
modeled by a random process: a probability of contagion isassigned to every link between an infected and a susceptibleperson. Percolation theory
9provides a theoretical description
of the spreading of infection. Moreover, concepts such asnetwork centrality10explain the varied importance of differ-
ent individuals in the spread of disease. Network models
take into account the complex structure of social relations,but they usually overlook the internal dynamics of a singleindividual and the interactions in an infectious–susceptiblepair, which are modeled only by random events occurringwith certain probabilities.
The goal of this paper is to introduce a dynamical model
of these interactions that can be exploited for educational
purposes and research alike. The model combines conceptsfrom dynamical systems and complex networks: the internal(health) state of each person interacts dynamically, not prob-
abilistically, with the state of other people in the network.Mathematically, the model is a coupled maps network exhib-iting many interesting phenomena.
11,12
The model is suggested by a similar treatment of neuronal
excitation in the cerebral cortex,13where each neuron is rep-
resented by a dynamical subsystem. During the evolution ofthe full system, a neuron interacts with other neurons (termed
post-synaptic) to which it sends an excitation that might trig-
ger these latter neurons to do the same, thus propagating anelectric signal through the network,
14sometimes producing a
cascade of excitations. Reference 15considered the extreme
value statistics of the excitation trees that compose such burstsof neuronal activity, which are experimentally observable.
16
In this paper, we discuss a similar dynamical system in
which the interacting individuals in a network can transmit
disease to create contagion trees. This simpliﬁed model does
not reproduce all aspects of reality, but includes some essen-tial features. We will show that the phenomena it reproduces
are representative of real-world behaviors, as is often the
case for models of complex systems.
Our model can be implemented by students with a modi-
cum of programming skills to visualize many phenomena
occurring in contagion dynamics. It can also be used to intro-
duce fundamental concepts in ergodic theory and statisticalmechanics. The suggested problems can serve as projects for
students of nonlinear dynamics or complex systems courses.
Finally, being purely deterministic and somewhat realistic,the model can be used to simulate real-world scenarios andtest the validity of stochastic approaches to the description of
disease transmission.
