Interested In
Morphology of symmetric ABCD tetrablock quaterpolymers studied by Monte Carlo simulation
J. Chem. Phys.  (November 2016)
Model of the Human Eye Based on ABCD Matrix
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2008)
Behavior intention for athlete post retirement life using Acylic Behavior Change Diagram (ABCD)
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2023) 04 October 2023 22:52:54
Beyond the ABCDs: A better matrix method for geometric optics
by using homogeneous coordinates
Theodore A. Corcovilosa)
Department of Physics, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15282
(Received 21 December 2021; accepted 14 February 2023)
Geometric optics is often described as tracing the paths of non-diffracting rays through an optical
system. In the paraxial limit, ray traces can be calculated using ray transfer matrices (colloquially,ABCD matrices), which are 2 /C22 matrices acting on the height and slope of the rays. A known
limitation of ray transfer matrices is that they only work for optical elements that are centered and
normal to the optical axis. In this article, we provide an improved 3 /C23 matrix method for
calculating paraxial ray traces of optical systems that is applicable to how these systems are
actually arranged on the optical table: lenses and mirrors in any orientation or position (e.g., in
laboratory coordinates), with the optical path zig-zagging along the table. Using projectiveduality, we also show how to directly image points through an optical system using a point
transfer matrix calculated from the system’s ray transfer matrix. We demonstrate the usefulness of
these methods with several examples and discuss future directions to expand the applications ofthis technique.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0083069
I. INTRODUCTION
Geometric optics describes light as non-diffracting rays
traveling through media and surfaces using the laws of
reﬂection and refraction. Assuming that the optical system oflenses, mirrors, etc., has a rotational axis of symmetry (theoptical axis), we can deﬁne the paraxial approximation asthe limit where the ray height hrelative to the axis is much
smaller in magnitude than other lengths in the system, suchas radii of curvature or focal lengths, and the slope mthe ray
makes with the optical axis has a magnitude much smaller
than one. In this paraxial limit, the effect of optical elements,
such as lenses and mirrors, may be approximated by linearfunctions of a ray’s height and slope. This approximation isoften the ﬁrst step in designing optical systems and is alsoone of the ﬁrst optics topics presented to students (yieldingthe Gaussian and Newtonian image equations, the lens-maker’s equation, etc.).
Under these conditions, the laws of reﬂection and refrac-
tion at planar and spherical surfaces may be replaced by their
Taylor series approximations to ﬁrst order in handmand,
therefore, may be expressed as matrix equations.
1–4These
matrices are known as ray transfer matrices (RTM), or“ABCD matrices” after their typical parameterization. In thisarticle, we revisit the ABCD matrices from a geometric per-spective, rather than a strictly algebraic one, and use geomet-ric insight into expand the functionality of our matrix
representation. We do this by introducing a homogeneous
coordinate representation of lines, showing that the ray trans-fer matrices are already applicable in this system, and thenadding geometric transformations to our set of allowed opera-tions. The ideas that we present here are implicit in advancedtreatments of optics, for example, the geometric optics chap-ters of Born and Wolf,
5but have not been previously ﬂeshed
out into an easy-to-use form. We ﬁll in the missing steps, and
the end result is a set of relatively simple algebraic rules formodelling almost any common optical setup.
The key new calculational tool that we use, expressing
lines and points in homogeneous coordinates (deﬁned in Sec.