Interested In
Advance of perihelion
American Journal of Physics  (September 2013)
Nonrelativistic contribution to Mercury’ s perihelion precession
American Journal of Physics  (June 1979)
Einstein's perihelion formula and its generalization
American Journal of Physics  (April 2015) 04 October 2023 23:13:47
Perihelion precession in power-law potentials: H /C19enon’s theorem
V.Dmitra /C20sinovic ´a)
Institute of Physics, Belgrade University, Pregrevica 118, Zemun, P.O. Box 57, 11080 Beograd, Serbia
Marija R. Jankovic ´
Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA, United Kingdom
(Received 2 December 2021; accepted 11 May 2022)
In 1977, Michel H /C19enon proved a remarkable theorem for planar N-body orbits in power-law
potentials that relates the rate of change of the perihelion angle (the precession rate), the rate of
change of the period evaluated at constant energy, the angular momentum of an orbit, and thepower law of the potential. We provide a simple proof of this theorem for two bodies in periodic
orbits that interact via a radial power-law force, which is, of course, equivalent to a one-body
problem with a power-law central potential. We discuss this theorem’s underlying assumptions andimplications, including its relation to Bertrand’s and Bohlin’s theorems, and we illustrate it with
several numerically calculated examples.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association
of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0080691
I. INTRODUCTION
The classical mechanics of two bodies interacting via a
radial force law has been studied in great detail over the past
300 years.1,2Bertrand’s theorem2states that central poten-
tials result in closed, elliptical orbits for all two-body bound
systems only for potentials proportional to 1 =r(Newtonian
gravity) or r2(harmonic oscillator). Therefore, for these two
potentials, precession of the perihelion occurs only whenthere is an external perturbation. A range of particular results
about the rate of change of this precession angle is known,
3
so much so that one might be forgiven for believing that
everything that can be known about orbits has been knownfor at least one century.
Yet, there is one comparatively recent (1977) non-trivial
result in this ﬁeld: H /C19enon’s theorem
4relates the rate of change
of the perihelion/aphelion angle to the rate of change of theperiod at ﬁxed energy for an N-body system moving in a plane.
H/C19enon’s theorem holds for any power-law potential, not only
for the two precession-free potentials discussed above.
Power-law potentials form an important subset in classical
mechanics: It is well known that power-law or homoge-neous
5potentials lead to simple scaling laws.1,6It is perhaps
less well known that these scaling laws lead to certain dual-
ity relations between periodic orbits in power-law potentials
of the form VðrÞ/C24raandVðrÞ/C24r/C22awhen the powers aand
/C22aare related by ðaþ2Þð/C22aþ2Þ¼4. This duality was dis-
covered by Bohlin7,8and Kasner9in the early 20th century
and discussed at length in this journal10–12and else-
where.13–16In some presentations, this duality appears as a
mere mathematical curiosity, but it is a direct consequence
of the homogeneity of the potential, i.e., of the underlying
scaling symmetry.
Normally, the properties of physical systems implied by
symmetry are studied in some detail in textbooks, but the scal-ing symmetry appears to be an exception, perhaps because of
the prevailing attitude that its consequences must be trivial.
However, as the example of H /C19enon’s theorem shows, the con-
sequences of classical or “engineering” scaling in point particledynamics are far from fully understood, and still farther from
being well known, even among experts in classical dynamics,
let alone the wider physics community.The purpose of this article is to present H /C19enon’s theorem,
provide an undergraduate-level proof for the two-body case,
and connect it with other results based on scaling arguments.
In particular, we shall show that H /C19enon’s theorem is consis-
tent with the aforementioned (power-law) conformal duality
in Newtonian two-body dynamics. Indeed, Bertrand’s theo-
rem receives a new meaning in view of H /C19enon’s theorem.
We also show how to use H /C19enon’s theorem and the duality
law to ﬁnd all power-law potentials integrable by means of
elliptic integrals.
This paper consists of six sections. After the Introduction,
in Sec. 