Interested In
The Sun's tilted axes
What causes the Sun’ s plasma jets?
The Sun in T ime: Magnetic Evolution of the Sun and the Ef fects on the Planets
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2009) 04 October 2023 23:22:20
The size of the Sun
M. A. Fardina)
Universit /C19e de Paris, CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, F-75013 Paris, France and The Academy of Bradylogists,
75013 Paris, France
M.Hautefeuille
Institut de Biologie Paris Seine, Sorbonne Universit /C19e, 7 quai Saint Bernard, 75005 Paris, France
(Received 11 December 2021; accepted 2 October 2022)
Why does the Sun have a radius around 696 000 km? We will see in this article that dimensional
arguments can be used to understand the size of the Sun and of a few other things along the way.
These arguments are not new and can be found scattered in textbooks. They are presented here in a
succinct way in order to better confront the kinematic and mechanical viewpoints on size. Wederive and compare a number of expressions for the size of the Sun and relate large and small
scales. We hope that such presentation will be useful to students, instructors, and researchers alike.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0081964
I. INTRODUCTION
InThe Character of Physical Law , Richard Feynman
stated that “every theoretical physicist who is any goodknows six or seven different theoretical representations for
exactly the same physics. He knows that they are all equiva-
lent, and that nobody is ever going to be able to decide whichone is right at that level, but he keeps them in his head, hop-ing that they will give him different ideas for guessing.”
1
Following Feynman’s advice, we provide several differentexpressions for the radius of the Sun. More generally, thiswill lead us to expressions for the size of other stars andastronomical bodies like planets and satellites, and eventu-
ally to a discussion of size in a broader sense.
Many excellent textbooks review the multiple sciences
involved in the understanding of stars, their mechanics,thermodynamics, acoustics, the intricacies of radiative andconvective processes, the interplay of atomic and nuclear
physics, or the crossover between quantum and relativistic
phenomena. To assist writing this article, we principally usedthe book Stellar Structure and Evolution .
2These many
approaches cover widely varying scales and viewpoints, andthey can be followed quite rigorously in many cases, yielding
very good agreement with observations. The present article
proposes a walk through some of the most thought-provokingformulas offered by this ﬁeld in order to show how the differ-ent viewpoints are related, painting a kaleidoscopic answer to
the question: “what is the size of the Sun?”
Volumes have been written on the physics of stars because
each argument that we will highlight can actually be pushedto a high degree of precision through adequate considerationof the geometric and dynamical subtleties underlying them.
To enable a wide-ranging exploration in the short span of
this article, we will have to neglect these subtleties; we willrely mostly on dimensional arguments. Formulas that will bepresented have to be understood as approximate, neglecting
small numerical factors of order 1. For instance, we will say
that the volume of a sphere of radius RisR
3, omitting the
factor 4 p=3. Similarly, we will neglect careful integration of
spatially varying ﬁelds like pressure and density and only
rely on approximate bulk averages. At no point shall we ven-
ture to state exact results, so we have used the sign “ ¼”t o
stand for approximate equality, where others usually use“/”o r“’.” We have reserved these last two symbols to,
respectively, stand for scaling relations and approximate
numerical results. Thus, when we will say that A/B,w e
mean that Ais proportional to B, and when we say that
A’aua, we mean that the value of Ain units uais approxi-
mately the number a.
