Interested In
Dirichlet downscaling model for synthetic solar irradiance time series
J. Renewable Sustainable Energy  (November 2020)
Analytic representation of the order parameter profiles and compressibility of a Ginzburg-Landau type
model with Dirichlet-Dirichlet boundary conditions on the walls confining the fluid
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2019)
Band structure of photonic crystal with dispersive and lossy materials using Dirichlet-to-Neumann wave
vector eigen equation method
J. Appl. Phys.  (August 2012) 04 October 2023 22:59:46
Yet another approach to solutions of one-dimensional wave equations
with inhomogeneous boundary conditions
Qiong-Gui Lina)
School of Physics, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, People’s Republic of China
(Received 4 June 2021; accepted 26 August 2021)
A very simple and straightforward approach to solutions of the one-dimensional wave equation in a
ﬁnite space domain with inhomogeneous boundary conditions is presented. Based on the physicalpicture of traveling waves and wave reﬂection, the solution of the problem can be written down
without much effort if the equation and the initial conditions are both homogeneous. This approach
is applicable to Dirichlet boundary conditions, Neumann ones and mixed ones (one end withDirichlet boundary condition and the other with Neumann). The solutions are given by ﬁnite sums
rather than inﬁnite series. When the boundary conditions are given by elementary functions such as
trigonometric functions, exponential functions, etc., the ﬁnite sums can be worked out explicitlyand the solution turns out to be unexpectedly simple.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0058957
I. INTRODUCTION
Solving the wave equation or the diffusion equation (in
one or more dimensions) with appropriate boundary and ini-
tial conditions is one of the basic problems in mathematicalphysics.
1–15If the space domain has a regular geometric
shape (a sphere, say), and the boundary conditions are homo-
geneous, it can be solved by the method of separation of var-
iables (if the equation is homogeneous) or by eigenfunction
expansion (if the equation is inhomogeneous). If the bound-
ary conditions are inhomogeneous, there exist essentially
two different approaches to the solution. The ﬁrst approach,
which is commonly presented in textbooks, makes a decom-
position of the dependent variable uðr;tÞ:uðr;tÞ¼u0ðr;tÞ
þvðr;tÞ, where u0ðr;tÞis some function satisfying the inho-
mogeneous boundary conditions, and then the new unknown
function vðr;tÞsatisﬁes homogeneous boundary conditions
and can be solved by the above-mentioned methods. In one
dimension, the construction of u0ðx;tÞis easy, while in
higher dimensions, it may be necessary to solve another
problem to ﬁnd u0ðr;tÞ.12The second approach is the method
of Green’s functions, which incorporates the inhomogeneous
boundary conditions into a solution that involves several
integrals. The Green’s function method for the Poisson or
Laplace equations is straightforward and discussed in
most textbooks of mathematical physics. The wave or diffu-
sion equation is somewhat more complicated, and the
Green’s function method is only dealt with in some
textbooks.7–11 ,13,14
In this paper, we revisit the one-dimensional wave equa-
tion in a ﬁnite space domain, which describes the transversal
vibration of a stretched string or the longitudinal vibration of
a ﬂexible rod. In this case, there exists yet another approach
for dealing with inhomogeneous boundary conditions. This
approach is very simple and easy, and the physical picture is
very clear, but to the best of our knowledge, it appeared
unnoticed before. Consider the most general problem with
an inhomogeneous equation, with inhomogeneous boundary
and initial conditions. By superposition, this can be decom-
posed into two problems, of which one has homogeneous
boundary conditions, and the other has inhomogeneous
boundary conditions but has both homogeneous equation andinitial conditions. Since the ﬁrst problem can be solved by
eigenfunction expansion, we concentrate our attention on the
second one. Based on the most general solutions of the wave
equation and the physical picture of traveling waves and
wave reﬂection, we can write down the solution to the sec-
ond problem without much effort. The solution is given by a
ﬁnite sum rather than an inﬁnite series. When the boundaryconditions are given by elementary functions such as trigo-
nometric functions, exponential functions, etc., the ﬁnite
sum can be worked out explicitly and the solution turns out
to be unexpectedly simple.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 