Interested In
Polarizing crowds: Consensus and bipolarization in a persuasive arguments model
Chaos  (June 2020)
The Peierls–Grif fiths argument for disordered Ising systems
J. Math. Phys.  (December 1981)
Students’ argument style through scientific reading-based inquiry: Improving argumentation skill in higher
education
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2019) 04 October 2023 22:52:08
Finding and improving bounds of real functions by thermodynamic
arguments
Andr /C19esVallejoa)
Facultad de Ingenier /C19ıa, Universidad de la Rep /C19ublica, Montevideo CP 11300, Uruguay
(Received 20 August 2022; accepted 12 January 2023)
The possibility of stating the second law of thermodynamics in terms of the increasing behaviour
of a physical property establishes a connection between that branch of physics and the theory ofalgebraic inequalities. We use this connection to show how some well-known inequalities, such as
the standard bounds for the logarithmic function or generalizations of Bernoulli’s inequality, can
be derived by thermodynamic methods. Additionally, we show that by comparing the globalentropy production in processes implemented with decreasing levels of irreversibility but subject to
the same change of state of one particular system, we can ﬁnd progressively better bounds for the
real function that represents the entropy variation of the system. As an application, some newfamilies of bounds for the function log ð1þxÞare obtained by this method.
#2023 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0121919
I. INTRODUCTION
In addition to the interest that algebraic inequalities pre-
sent from a purely mathematical point of view, they are also
fundamental tools in physics, economics, statistics, and
likely in any branch of science that employs mathematics in
its formal description. Inequalities involving elementary
functions appear so frequently in other disciplines that the
problem of bounding them is an important issue. One of the
most ubiquitous elementary functions is the (natural) loga-
rithm, for which the following bounds are probably well
known by the reader
x
1þx/C20logð1þxÞ/C20x;x>/C01: (1)
In what follows, we refer to Eq. (1)as the standard bounds
for the logarithmic function. From a geometric point of
view, the standard bounds are a consequence of the concave
behaviour of the function fðxÞ¼logð1þxÞ: Since a con-
cave function is upper-bounded by its tangent line at anypoint, fis bounded by the function t(x)¼x, which is its tan-
gent line at x¼0; the lower bound is an equivalent form of
the upper bound, obtained by the change of variable
zþ1¼1=ðxþ1Þ. Although the power and simplicity of the
standard bounds are indisputable, in practical applications
sharper bounds could be useful, so improvements of Eq. (1)
have been obtained by several researchers, albeit at the
expense of simplicity.1–3
In this work, we address the problem of improving the
bounds given in Eq. (1)by a method based on physical
considerations. According to the second law of thermody-
namics, the entropy of the Universe increases in any real
physical process. Consequently, a symbolic expression for
the entropy variation is always non-negative. This idea
can be traced back to the nineteenth century, where it was
ﬁrst used to prove the inequality between the arithmetic
and geometric means,4a proof that has been indepen-
dently rediscovered at least six times.5–10The thermody-
namic relevance of this particular inequality has been
revealed in the context of studies of the efﬁciency of
reversible heat engines operating between ﬁnite and inﬁ-
nite reservoirs.11A related concept here is the fact that the global entropy
change is a measure of the departure of a thermodynamicprocess from the reversible limit. This implies that if wecompare the entropy production in two processes in whichthe system undergoes the same change of state, less entropy
will be produced in the implementation that is closer to that
limit. This fact allows us to obtain a sharper bound for theentropy variation of the system, which, of course, is thesame in both cases since entropy is a state function.
The method explored here not only allows students to
deduce familiar results from an unusual starting point but
also to obtain potentially novel results employing accessible
tools. Including this perspective while teaching these topicsmight motivate curiosity and autonomous research instudents.
The outline of this paper is as follows: In Sec. 