Interested In
Comparison of dif ferent optical mounting medias used on calcareous nannofossils smear slides
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2022)
Design of hybrid mechanically stabilized earth walls with soil nailing
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2021)
Hybrid wall design of soil nail and ground anchor
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2021) 04 October 2023 23:22:00
Graphical analysis of an oscillator with constant magnitude
sliding friction
V.Roitberga)and Alon Droryb)
Physics Unit, Afeka College of Engineering, 38 Mivtsa Kadesh St., Tel Aviv-Yafo 6910717, Israel
(Received 4 October 2021; accepted 26 September 2022)
We treat a horizontal oscillator damped by constant-magnitude sliding friction by extending the
analogy between the simple harmonic motion of a mass on a spring and the uniform circularmotion of a mass attached to the end of a string. In the presence of sliding friction, the motion of
the mass on a spring becomes the horizontal projection of the path of a mass attached to a string
winding around two nails separated by a well-deﬁned distance; this path is a spiral consisting ofconnected semi-circles of diminishing radii. This graphical analysis is very simple and
pedagogically useful. It can also be generalized to any oscillation affected by other forces of
constant magnitude but not necessarily constant direction.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0073812
I. INTRODUCTION
The standard presentation of harmonic motion in an intro-
ductory physics course begins with a mass moving on a
horizontal surface whilst attached to a spring. Under idealno-friction conditions, the mass performs simple harmonicmotion (SHM). The next natural step should be relaxing the
idealization of the system by adding sliding friction, but this
is nearly never done. Instead one usually adds drag, avelocity-dependent force representing the resistance of aﬂuid (possibly air). The resulting behavior is damped har-monic motion (DHM).
Up to this point, however, drag is routinely ignored in the
introductory course, even where it would be natural, as in
projectile motion. One common way to motivate its intro-duction in harmonic motion is to ﬁrst treat the vertical springsystem in which a block is hung from the ceiling by a spring
and oscillates vertically. When solid surfaces are absent,
sliding friction is irrelevant and drag becomes a natural con-sideration. However, the vertical spring system requires a bitof care because gravitation shifts the system’s equilibrium
position.
Some (admittedly a minority) of our more curious students
wonder why we do not also treat the apparently natural caseof solid-on-solid friction. Furthermore, once exposed toDHM, they sometimes ask whether a horizontal spring with
sliding friction also settles eventually at its relaxed length,
whether it requires an inﬁnite time to stop, whether its periodis affected, and whether it has a constant period at all. Thismotivated us to look for a simple approach to the horizontal
spring with sliding friction.
The oscillator with solid-on-solid friction has been treated
several times before.
1–7Unfortunately, most teachers seem
to feel that the problem is either conceptually challenging,mathematically tedious, or both. Indeed, previous treatmentsuse either work-energy considerations, in which every semi-
cycle must be treated independently and anew, or differential
equations that produce a split-function, and are possibly a lit-tle advanced for introductory courses.
In this paper, we offer an elementary treatment of the
problem based on an intuitive visualization of the solution
and analogies with SHM. Qualitative properties become
transparent, and many quantitative results can also beobtained easily. One important pedagogical advantage of
this treatment is in teaching the power of analogies. The ideaof using simple systems as analogies of more complex ones
is an important tool for any student of science. The present
approach is a very good example of how to analyze a muchmore complex problem (oscillations with solid-on-solid fric-
tion) by using only the solution of simple harmonic motion,
which is far better known and more accessible. We considerthis pedagogical aspect to be one of the important advantages
of our treatment.
We begin in Sec. 