IL 01 2022
Balloon-borne two-channel infrared spectral photometer for
observation of atmospheric greenhouse effect by
undergraduates 
Gerard T . Blanchard ; Fawaz A. Adesina ; William Cole Belkwell ; James R. Dyess ; Victoria A. Frabbiele ;
Conor S. McGibboney ; Ryan D. Rumsey
Am. J. Phys.  90, 256–262 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009284
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
An Interference Fringe Photometer
American Journal of Physics  (August 1965)
Pulse Counting Photometer for Microspectroscopy
Rev Sci Instrum  (December 2004)
A NEW PHOT O ‐ CELL PHOT OMETER
Rev Sci Instrum  (December 2004) 04 October 2023 23:06:19
Balloon-borne two-channel infrared spectral photometer for
observation of atmospheric greenhouse effect by undergraduates
Gerard T. Blanchard, Fawaz A. Adesina, William Cole Belkwell, James R. Dyess,
Victoria A. Frabbiele, Conor S. McGibboney, and Ryan D. Rumsey
Department of Chemistry and Physics, Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, Louisiana 70402
(Received 3 December 2020; accepted 27 December 2021)
We present a simple design of a balloon-borne infrared spectral photometer that can be built and used
by undergraduate students to perform an experiment demonstrating the atmospheric greenhouseeffect. The experiment demonstrates that the Earth radiates heat to space in the infrared region but
that the radiation at the top of the atmosphere has a much lower effective radiation temperature than
at the surface of the Earth, which is the essence of the greenhouse effect. The experiment alsodemonstrates that the greenhouse effect is much more pronounced in molecular absorption bands
than in the so-called infrared window. The thrill of putting together a balloon experiment aside,
students performing this experiment also gained experience in practical applications of Planck’s law.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009284
I. INTRODUCTION
The atmospheric greenhouse effect1is a signiﬁcant com-
ponent of the Earth’s climate system.2However, the typical
physics curriculum rarely includes an experimental investi-
gation of the effect. As discussed by Bell,3previously pub-
lished benchtop demonstrations that purport to demonstratethis effect
4–6are in fact more sensitive to convective rather
than radiative heat transfer, so that they fail to illustrategreenhouse effect-induced warming.
7,8One exception is
Sieg et al.9who do demonstrate the absorption of IR radia-
tion by CO 2gas, which is one component of the greenhouse
effect. To overcome the limitations of benchtop experiments,we developed an in situ experiment in the Earth’s atmo-
sphere to demonstrate this crucial aspect of the Earth’s cli-
mate to students. It can be performed by undergraduates,providing that they have access to a high-altitude balloon. Inour case, we beneﬁted from the Louisiana Space GrantConsortium’s Louisiana Aerospace Catalyst Experience forStudents (LaACES) Program.
10
To understand how the greenhouse effect is essential to
explain the temperature at the Earth’s surface, let us ﬁrstassume that the atmosphere does not play any role. In thisﬁrst very simple model, the Earth absorbs approximately/
q¼235 W/m2of heat from the Sun in the form of ultravio-
let (UV), visible (VIS), and near-infrared (IR) radiation.2In
the steady state, the Earth re-radiates this heat back to space
in the form of mid- to far-IR thermal radiation with an effec-tive temperature Tof 254 K, which can be inferred from the
Stefan-Boltzmann law, /
q¼5:67/C210/C08Wm/C02K/C04 ðÞ T4.
In this model, the average temperature of the Earth’s surfacewould be T/C25254 K. This ﬁrst simplistic model, therefore,
cannot account for the actual average surface temperature ofthe Earth, which is 287 K.
11
To be more realistic, one can devise a second model,
where the Earth is in radiative equilibrium with a singleatmospheric layer containing greenhouse gasses that absorb
none of the UV, VIS, and near-IR radiation from the Sun,
but do absorb a fraction fof the mid- to far-IR thermal radia-
tion from the Earth. The thermal energy absorbed by theatmosphere is re-radiated equally upward to space and down-ward to the Earth, so that this additional heat ﬂux raises theEarth’s surface temperature. In this model, an average sur-
face temperature of 287 K is obtained if f¼77%,
12whereas
the actual value is closer to f¼90%.2
Furthermore, to accurately describe the observed altitudinal
dependence of the effective IR radiation temperature, one
needs a more realistic model that considers the atmosphere to
be composed of multiple atmospheric layers containing green-house gasses in radiative-convective equilibrium.
13The tem-
perature of the atmospheric layers decreases with altitude dueto adiabatic cooling of rising air parcels in response to thehydrostatic decrease in atmospheric pressure with altitude. Athigher altitudes, the absorbed IR radiation is, therefore, re-radiated at lower temperatures. Observing the decrease ineffective radiation temperature with altitude is the ﬁrst objec-
tive of this experiment.
The second objective of this experiment is to demonstrate
the spectral effect of greenhouse gasses on the effective radi-
ation temperature. In the [8–12] lm wavelength band, the IR
transmittance from the surface of the Earth to space is veryhigh in the absence of clouds. This wavelength band isreferred to as the atmospheric IR window. At slightly shorterwavelengths, IR radiation is strongly absorbed by watervapor, and at slightly longer wavelengths, IR radiation isstrongly absorbed by carbon dioxide.
14These two gasses are
predominantly responsible for the absorption of IR radiation
in the atmosphere. In our experiment, we measure separately
the effective radiation temperature in the IR window and theabsorption bands. We expect that the effective radiation tem-perature to space will be higher in the atmospheric windowthan in the absorption bands, since radiation to space thenoriginates from deeper (and warmer) layers of theatmosphere.
To compare with the experimental results, we have per-
formed a simulation of the infrared radiation transfer in theatmosphere using MODTRAN.
15,16MODTRAN is an algo-
rithm that models the atmosphere as a series of horizontally
homogenous layers and calculates the transmittance andradiance of the atmospheric constituents in each layer in0.2 cm
/C01spectral bands over the [0.2–100] lm spectral
range. Figure 1shows the MODTRAN-simulated upward IR
heat ﬂux spectrum at the surface of the Earth and at an alti-tude of 25 km, using the parameter values listed in Table I.17
256 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 256 04 October 2023 23:06:19
At the surface of the Earth, the IR heat ﬂux spectrum dis-
plays the characteristic blackbody shape with a maximum
emission near 10 lm. At an altitude of 25 km, however, the
spectrum displays differential absorption with little absorp-tion in the range from 8 lm to approximately 12 lm (except
for the narrow ozone absorption band near 10 lm), but
presents bands of signiﬁcant absorption outside of that.Although the IR heat ﬂux spectrum is not that of a black-body, one can calculate an effective radiative temperature T
by integrating the spectrum and comparing it to the integral
of Planck’s law as follows:
ð
kmax
kmind/q
dkdk¼2hc2Xðkmax
kmindk
k5ehc=kkT ðÞ /C01 ðÞ; (1)
where his Planck’s constant, cis the speed of light, Xis ﬁeld
of view of the detector expressed as a solid angle, and kis
Boltzmann’s constant. One can calculate an effective radia-
tion temperature for the spectrum as a whole, or for any
selected wavelength band [ kmin,kmax]. Our practical method
of inverting Eq. (1)to calculate the effective radiation tem-
perature is presented in Appendix A . Figure 2shows the alti-
tude dependence of the effective radiation temperature forthree bands: observed (designated o) [5.5 lm, 14 lm]; IR
window band (designated w)[ 8lm, 12 lm]; and absorption
band (designated a) [5.5 lm, 8.0 lm]þ[12.0 lm, 14.0 lm].
Figure 2, therefore, models the expected results of our
experiment.
