Interested In
Determination of the T ransverse Width and Distance of an Object with a Smartphone Camera
Phys. T each.  (January 2023)
Non-invasive neonatal jaundice determination using smartphone camera
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2022)
Reducing light intensity using blue light filter on LED-based smartphone screen
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2023) 04 October 2023 23:14:28
Using a smartphone camera to explore ray optics beyond the thin lens
equation
M. C. Sullivana)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Ithaca College, Ithaca, New York 14850
(Received 9 March 2022; accepted 13 May 2022)
Ray optics is a staple of introductory physics classes, but many students do not have the
opportunity to explore optics beyond the thin lens equation. In this paper, we expand upon asuccessful remote experiment using a smartphone camera to explore both the successes and
limitations of the thin lens equation. Application of the thin lens equation reveals a linear
relationship between the object distance and the inverse image height in pixels. Using the open-source image analysis tool ImageJ to measure the image height, we can ﬁnd the effective focal
length of the smartphone camera lens. Our measured focal lengths agree well with the stated
manufacturer values for the effective focal lengths. Further application of the thin lens equation isnot successful, but a modiﬁcation of the analysis leads to an explanation and experimental
determination of the location of the principal planes in the smartphone camera systems. This
experiment can work well at the introductory level, either in person or remote, and can be used asan introduction or motivation to explore more advanced topics in ray optics.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0090854
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the recent decade, the need for high-quality and low-
cost labs that can be conducted remotely has grown consider-
ably. This need, driven originally by “traditional” online
courses and MOOCs,1grew exponentially in 2020 when the
COVID-19 pandemic forced many institutions to suddenly
switch to a remote format for all courses, including for tradi-
tional hands-on labs.
Over roughly the same time period, the smartphone
evolved from a single-use item to a veritable physics lab that
can ﬁt into a pocket. The smartphone has multiple internal
sensors that can be leveraged for remote labs.2,3In particular,
the camera(s) in a smartphone are highly sophisticated and
sensitive. The smartphone camera can be used in a variety of
optical experiments, including studies of polarization,4
astronomy,5,6the lensmaker’s equation,7and the thin lens
equation,8,9as well as experiments that explore the shutter
speed or the CMOS sensor itself.10For students in the life
sciences, the smartphone can be used to study the human
eye11or modiﬁed to act as an optical or ﬂuorescence
microscope.12
In this article, we combine and then build on the work of
Refs. 8,9, and 13to create a comprehensive remote optics
lab. This experiment uses only a smartphone, a ruler, and
open-source software but is scalable and can be customized
for students in introductory courses, intermediate or
advanced lab courses, or optics courses. The article begins
with a straightforward investigation of the thin lens equation.
More advanced students can examine their experimental data
in a different way using a binomial approximation. Students
with a strong interest in optics or at the start of an optics
course can explore how the thin lens equation fails to fully
explain their experimental data. Understanding this failure
leads naturally to an exploration of thick lenses, multiplelens systems, and the principal planes inside any complex
optical system. The introduction of principal planes can
motivate a discussion of the system ray transfer matrix
method of geometrical optics. The system ray transfer matrixand the principal planes are an excellent place to begin a dis-
cussion of epistemology in physics and how to understand
the beneﬁts and limits of any particular model of a system.
