Investigating and improving student understanding of the
basics for a system of identical particles 
Christof Keebaugh ; Emily Marshman ; Chandralekha Singh
Am. J. Phys.  90, 1 10–1 17 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0006910
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Improving student understanding of fine structure corrections to the energy spectrum of the hydrogen atom
Am. J. Phys.  (July 2019)
Improving student understanding of a system of identical particles with a fixed total energy
Am. J. Phys.  (July 2019)
Quarks & Quilts: A Physics Sampler
The Physics T eacher  (May 2005) 04 October 2023 23:01:50
Investigating and improving student understanding of the basics
for a system of identical particles
Christof Keebaugh, Emily Marshman, and Chandralekha Singh
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260
(Received 10 May 2020; accepted 12 October 2021)
We discuss an investigation of students’ difﬁculties with systems of non-interacting identical
particles. The investigation was carried out in advanced quantum mechanics courses at both theundergraduate and graduate levels by administering free-response and multiple-choice questions
and conducting individual interviews with students. This research on student difﬁculties was used
as a guide to develop and evaluate a Quantum Interactive Learning Tutorial (QuILT) that helpsstudents develop a functional understanding of the concepts necessary for determining the many-
particle Hamiltonian and stationary state wavefunctions for a system of non-interacting identical
particles.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006910
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum mechanics (QM) is a particularly challenging
subject for students.1–20Our group has been investigating
student reasoning in QM21–28and using it as a guide for
improving student understanding of QM.29–34For example,
we have focused on using the common student difﬁculties as
a guide to develop research-based learning tools that include
Quantum Interactive Learning Tutorials (QuILTs),35–46
which strive to improve student understanding of QM con-
cepts. However, there have been very limited investigations
into student difﬁculties with concepts involving a system ofidentical particles.
Here, we discuss an investigation of student difﬁculties
with fundamentals of a system of non-interacting identical
particles. That research was used as a guide in the develop-ment, validation, and in-class evaluation of a QuILT thathelps students develop a good grasp of relevant concepts.
We found common student difﬁculties that can hinder their
development of a consistent and coherent knowledge struc-ture pertaining to these concepts. Below, we start with a brief
background of relevant concepts and then describe the con-
text of the investigation, common student difﬁculties, thestructure of the QuILT that takes into account these difﬁcul-
ties found via research, and the in-class implementation of
the QuILT.
