Interested In
Laser diode coherence
Am. J. Phys.  (September 2020)
Michelson in 1887
Physics T oday  (May 1987)
The Michelson Museum
American Journal of Physics  (April 1954) 04 October 2023 23:08:56
Michelson interferometry with a diode laser
Abdulaziz M. Aljalala)
Physics Department, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
(Received 8 July 2021; accepted 31 January 2022)
A typical Fabry–P /C19erot diode laser is used to study the relationship between the laser spectrum and the
interference signal obtained from a Michelson interferometer. The interference signal is measured overa range of path length differences of a few centimeters, and the laser spectrum is obtained with a
spectrometer of a high resolution of 0.005 nm. Contrary to the laser datasheet, the laser is found to have
several longitudinal modes even at high injection currents well above the threshold current. A simple
model based on treating the laser’s longitudinal modes as pure sinusoidal waves is derived and
successfully used in modeling the complex and repetitive interference signal. The spectral spacing andthe laser cavity length can be found from the interference signal without the need to use a spectrometer,
provided that the interference signal is measured over a long enough range of path length differences.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0062798
I. INTRODUCTION
A Michelson interferometer is a standard apparatus for
studying light interference in physics undergraduate labs. Its
capability of making precise displacement measurementsmakes it an important instrument in research and industry.1–3
It is utilized widely in Fourier transform spectroscopy,4,5
optical coherence tomography,6and laser wavelength mea-
surement.7Originally, in 1887, it was used by Michelson
and Morley to show that light does not need a medium to
propagate,8a fact that paved the way to the special theory of
relativity.
In a Michelson interferometer, an incoming light beam is
split into two beams that are reﬂected back by two mirrors torecombine at the beam splitter and interfere. The optical path
difference between the two interfering beams can be adjusted
by translating either of the two mirrors. Interference, whichcan be observed as dark and bright fringes, is observed only
over a limited range of path differences. This range is a mea-
sure of the light’s temporal coherence length.
For a light source with a simple structureless spectral
shape, the temporal coherence length is inversely propor-tional to the width of the spectral shape. If the spectrum of
the light source has two close peaks of roughly equal intensi-
ties, then the visibility of interference fringes varies in a peri-odic manner with the path difference of the two interfering
beams. The range over which the interference can be
observed is inversely proportional to the spectral width ofthe individual peak and is not related to the overall width ofthe spectrum.
9,10Using his interferometer, Michelson was
able to resolve very closely spectral lines, such as the sodium
D-lines at 588.995 and 589.592 nm.11Still today, Michelson
interferometer is the most popular way to measure the sepa-
ration of the sodium D-lines in introductory university phys-
ics labs.12For a light source with narrow equally spaced
spectral lines, such as the emission from a multi-longitudinal-mode laser, the visibility of the interference as a function
of path difference can be rather complicated, but it is
periodic.
ten Bosch and de Voigt used a Michelson interferometer
to determine the number and intensity of longitudinal modes
of a 1-m-long multimode He–Ne laser. The mode intensities
were determined from the Fourier transform of the visibilityof the interference pattern in the region around zero pathlength difference, which extended over 1 m, while the mode
spacing was determined from the period of visibility, whichwas 2 m. However, the error in the measurements was rather
large at a large path length difference, probably due to the
instability of the interference pattern.
10
Compared to a typical gas laser, such as the He–Ne laser,
which has a relatively long cavity of tens of centimeters, a
diode laser has a relatively short optical cavity length of abouta millimeter. Hence, interference signal from a Michelson
interferometer over a few centimeters is enough to reveal valu-
able information about the diode laser, such as its mode spac-
ing and relative intensities of its spectral lines. M €ollmann et al.
used a Fourier transform spectrometer, which is basically aMichelson interferometer, to study the spectra of a diode laser.
The spectrum presented for the diode laser above the threshold
has one dominant laser peak with two small longitudinal side
modes, but no information about the injection current is pro-
vided. The laser cavity length is determined by three differentmethods: from a microscopic image, from the mode spacing of
Fourier transform spectra, and from interferograms obtained
from a Fourier transform spectrometer.
13Poddar et al. used
optical coherence tomography, which employs a Michelson
interferometer, to obtain resolved spectra for the longitudinalmodes of a diode laser operated above threshold, but they
observed no interference peaks below threshold.14Yet,
no detail was provided on how a maximum optical path differ-
ence of 2 /C216 mm can result in a separation of about df
/C250:03 GHz between two adjacent points in the frequency
domain, which should be, according to the Fourier transform
theory, at least df/C25c=2/C216 mmðÞ /C259 GHz.15
Diode lasers are widely available, and they are relatively
cheap. Most of the commercial diode lasers, such as those
used in laser pointers and disc players, are edge-emitting
lasers of a Fabry–P /C19erot type where the two parallel cleaved
facets of the diode are used as the laser reﬂectors.
Typically, the lateral dimensions of a low-power diode
laser are small enough that it can only support the lowest
transverse oscillation mode, but the cavity is long enough
that it can support many longitudinal modes. A longitudinaloscillation mode occurs when a standing wave is formed by
a wave that is reﬂected back and forth from the diode fac-
ets, requiring that the optical pathlength of a round trip of
the wave within the diode, 2 nl, is an integer multiple of the
wavelength k:
373 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 373 04 October 2023 23:08:56
2nl¼mk: (1)
Here, nis the index of refraction of the diode material, lis
the length of the diode, and mis a positive integer for the
mode number. A formula for the wavelength difference
between two adjacent longitudinal modes Dkcan be found
by differentiating Eq. (1)to yield 2 Dnl¼DmkþmDk. For
positive Dk,Dmshould be /C01, and eliminating mby using
Eq.(1)leads to
Dk¼k2
2ngl; (2)
where ng/C17n/C0kDn=Dk¼n/C0kdn=dkis the group index
of refraction.
For a typical diode laser operating around k¼635 nm,
using l/C25500lm, and ng/C254:5 leads to Dk/C250:1 nm. This
mode separation is much smaller than the gain bandwidth of
a diode laser, which is typically a few nanometers.
Therefore, it is not unusual for these lasers to have severallongitudinal modes oscillating simultaneously.
Unfortunately, some laser diode datasheets are misleading
with respect to the longitudinal modes. For example, the
datasheet of laser diode HL6320G from Hitachi states that itis a single longitudinal mode laser,
16although it is not. In
addition, the user of these diodes might also be misled by the
fact that their modes, which have a separation of less than
0.1 nm, cannot be resolved with typical spectrometers avail-
able in physics teaching labs. Treating a multimode laser asa single-mode laser makes it difﬁcult to interpret correctly
the interference obtained from a Michelson interferometer.
For instance, Gfroerer and Bergthold used an HL6320G laserdiode to measure interferograms from a Michelson interfer-
ometer over a scanning range of 1 mm.
17Despite their excel-
lent experimental work, they had some challenges ininterpreting some of their observations because they assumed
that the laser has only one single longitudinal mode above
threshold. Particularly, they attributed the reduction in thesignal as the mirror moves away from the zero path length
difference to mirror misalignment. Also, they determined the
mode spacing indirectly by two methods, but both seem tobe off by almost an order of magnitude. This leads to a clear
inconsistency between the measured physical length of
the laser, 700 lm, and the length calculated from the inferred
modes spacing, 100 lm. Moreover, they had difﬁcultyexplaining the shoulder appearing on some of the peaks at
high laser current.
In this work, an HL6320G laser diode is used to study
interference from a Michelson interferometer over a path dif-
ference range of 40 mm. A high-resolution spectrometer,
capable of resolving individual longitudinal modes, showsthat the laser has several longitudinal modes even at a veryhigh laser injection current. A model based on treating thelaser modes as pure sinusoidal waves is used to successfullymodel the complex and periodic interference signal. Themodel is simple enough to be understood by a student who is
familiar with interference phenomenon at the level of a ﬁrst-
year college physics course. It is also shown that that thelaser mode spacing and the laser optical length can be foundaccurately from the interference signal without the need for aspectrometer. This work may be suitable as a basis for a labexperiment or a project introducing students to diode lasersand Michelson interferometry.
