Improved spectral photometer for undergraduate
observations of atmospheric infrared heat flux and
greenhouse gas absorption bandsa) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Gerard T . Blanchard ; Bryce A. Bowlsbey ; James R. Dyess ; Ryan D. Rumsey ; Justin B. W oodring
Am. J. Phys.  91, 708–713 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0135029
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
An Interference Fringe Photometer
American Journal of Physics  (August 1965)
Pulse Counting Photometer for Microspectroscopy
Rev Sci Instrum  (December 2004)
A NEW PHOT O ‐ CELL PHOT OMETER
Rev Sci Instrum  (December 2004) 04 October 2023 22:56:40
Improved spectral photometer for undergraduate observations
of atmospheric infrared heat flux and greenhouse gas absorptionbands
a)
Gerard T. Blanchard,b)Bryce A. Bowlsbey,c)James R. Dyess,d)Ryan D. Rumsey,
and Justin B. Woodringe)
Department of Chemistry and Physics, Southeastern Louisiana University, Hammond, Louisiana 70402
(Received 15 November 2022; accepted 9 June 2023)
We present an experiment investigating the physics of the atmospheric greenhouse effect that can be
performed by undergraduate physics students. The students construct a three-channel spectral
photometer to observe the infrared heat ﬂux in the atmosphere. With this spectral photometer, thestudents observe the difference in heat ﬂux between the portion of the IR spectrum that is absorbed
by water vapor and carbon dioxide and the portion that is not absorbed by atmospheric constituents.
The students discover that Earth’s surface is warmed by radiation from the greenhouse gasabsorption bands, and the radiation of heat to space is retarded by the absorption bands. One
component of the experiment is performed on the ground and the other component is performed in
the atmosphere using a high-altitude balloon. The students then compare their results to a simulationof infrared radiation transport in the atmosphere.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0135029
I. INTRODUCTION
The atmospheric greenhouse effect1is a signiﬁcant com-
ponent of Earth’s climate system.2Averaged over Earth’s
entire surface, the solar irradiance is 341 W/m2of electro-
magnetic radiation, mostly in the near-infrared (IR), visible(VIS), and ultraviolet (UV) wavelength regions.3Of this
radiation, 102 W/m2is reﬂected back into space as UV, VIS,
and near-IR, and 239 W/m2is absorbed and re-radiated into
space as mid-infrared region radiation3with an effective
radiation temperature of 255 K, in accordance with the
Stefan–Boltzmann law,
239 W m/C02¼5:67/C210/C08Wm/C02K/C04 ðÞ 255 KðÞ4:(1)
If Earth’s atmosphere lacked mid-IR absorbing constituents,
then that average radiation temperature of 255 K ( /C018/C14C)
would also correspond to the average temperature of Earth’ssurface.
However, Earth’s atmosphere does contain constituents
such as water vapor and carbon dioxide that have signiﬁcant
absorption bands in the mid-IR region, corresponding tomolecular rotational-vibrational transitions. Therefore, IR
radiation upwelling from Earth’s surface is partially
absorbed by those atmospheric constituents and re-radiatedisotropically, generating downwelling IR radiation with a
spectral signature corresponding to the spectrum of the
absorption bands and with an average heat ﬂux of 333 W/m
2
at Earth’s surface.3This additional IR heat ﬂux raises the
average surface temperature to 289 K (16/C14C), corresponding
to an IR heat ﬂux of 396 W/m2upwelling from the surface.3
This surface warming by IR radiation from atmospheric con-
stituents that absorb IR radiation is referred to as the atmo-
spheric greenhouse effect. Observation and measurement of
the spectrum of the downwelling radiation from the atmo-sphere is the ﬁrst objective of this experiment.
Not all of the surface cooling occurs through IR radiation.
Some (97 W/m2on average) results from thermal convection
and evaporation.3In a thermal convection cell, rising airexpands adiabatically as the atmospheric pressure decreases
with altitude, which causes a decrease in atmospheric tem-perature with altitude throughout the troposphere, the layer
of the atmosphere that participates in thermal convection.
This decrease in the ambient atmospheric temperature withaltitude means that as the altitude increases, the absorbed IR
radiation is re-radiated at lower temperatures. Observation
and measurement of the decrease in effective radiation tem-perature with altitude is the second objective of this experi-ment. The third and ﬁnal objective is to observe and measure
spectral differences in the upwelling and downwelling infra-
red radiation to better understand the roles of IR-absorbingcomponents in the greenhouse effect.
In a previous paper,
4we presented an investigation into
some of these aspects of the atmospheric greenhouse effect
that can be performed by undergraduates with access tohigh-altitude ballooning.5In this article, we present an
expansion of, and improvement upon, that experiment. We
present a ground-based investigation that can be performedby undergraduates who build a three-channel infrared spec-
tral photometer that measures the spectral heat ﬂux of infra-
red radiation from atmospheric water vapor in thewavelength range from 5.5 to 8 lm; from atmospheric car-
bon dioxide in the wavelength range from 12 to 14 lm; and
from the so-called “IR window” in between these absorptionbands from 8 to 12 lm. We also present an improvement
upon the design of the original 2-channel balloon-borne
spectral photometer, which is more accurate and hasexpanded capabilities over the original. Finally, we present
the results from the ﬂight of this improved instrument.
The student learning outcomes from this experiment are
numerous. With regard to learning about the greenhouseeffect, the students learn that the downwelling heat ﬂux from
a clear sky comes primarily from the molecular absorption
bands while clouds radiate in both the IR window and in theabsorption bands, that the upwelling radiation temperature
decreases with altitude in the atmosphere and that the
upwelling heat ﬂux is much lower in the absorption bandsthan in the IR window, and that clouds also reduce the IR
708 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 708 04 October 2023 22:56:40
heat ﬂux through the atmosphere. In addition, students learn
applications of Planck’s law, infrared ﬁlters, electronics, and
programming. Finally, the students also learn about project
management and engineering design. All of these align with
learning objectives for preparing physics students for 21st-
century careers.6
