IL 01 2023
A charge analysis of non-invasive electrical brain
stimulation 
Maurice M. Klee  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 264–277 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0085625
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Isolation and molecular detection of Salmonella from broiler chickens in Baghdad city
AIP Conf. Proc.  (September 2023)
The sum rule for spectroscopic factors in the seniority scheme of identical particles
J. Math. Phys.  (January 1987) 04 October 2023 22:51:11
A charge analysis of non-invasive electrical brain stimulation
Maurice M. Kleea)
National Institutes of Health (retired), Bethesda, Maryland 20892
(Received 18 January 2022; accepted 6 December 2022)
The brain is an electric organ. As such, for well over a hundred years, physicists, engineers,
biologists, and physicians have used electromagnetic theory to try to understand how the brainworks and to diagnose and treat disease. The ﬁeld of electro-neuroscience is immense with
thousands of papers being published each year. In this paper, we provide physics students with an
introduction to the ﬁeld using a conventional model of the head that employs four concentric
spheres having different conductivities to represent the scalp, skull, cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), and
the brain itself. To ground the discussion, we use the speciﬁc case of non-invasive DC electricalstimulation of the brain through electrodes applied to the surface of the scalp, a procedure known
as transcranial DC stimulation or tDCS. Currently, tDCS is under clinical investigation for such
diseases as depression, anxiety, and chronic pain as well as to enhance the performance of athletesand the training of ﬁghter pilots. We solve the corresponding physics problem from a charge
perspective and explain why the charge distributions look the way they do using what we call the
“sensing pixel” technique. This paper can introduce students to the ways in which electromagnetictheory is being applied to problems in neuroscience; in this case, the problem of how to non-
invasively stimulate the brain to treat disease or improve performance.
#2023 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0085625
I. INTRODUCTION
Motivating students to engage with electromagnetic theory
has been and continues to be a challenge for physics teach-ers.
1Fortunately, electromagnetic theory is today at the heart
of neuroscience. It is used both to interpret electrical signalsrecorded from the brain such as the electroencephalogram
(EEG) and to understand the effects on the brain of the elec-
trical stimulation used in the treatment of such diseases asdepression, anxiety, and chronic pain. The latter problem ofunderstanding the effects of electrical stimulation on thebrain will be our focus here.
Not only is brain electricity something that students will
hear about in the news throughout their lives, it is intrinsi-cally interesting because it relates to how our bodies work.As it turns out, our brains are wired so that the default modeis to think about ourselves.
2Giving students the opportunity
to do that academically in a physics class can only be good.
The brain with all its details is, of course, too complicated
for a student’s ﬁrst look into brain electricity (see, for exam-ple, Fig. 1(a)). In this paper, we use a well-established elec-
trical model for the brain: A set of concentric spheres havingdifferent electrical conductivities that represent a scalp (skin)layer, a skull (bone) layer, a cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) layer,and a central brain (Fig. 1(b)).
3–10For context, the concentric
sphere model was the ﬁrst model used by psychologists to
interpret electroencephalograms and is still used as a com-parator for more accurate models.
11Hence, having studied
the sphere model, physics students can walk across campusto the psychology department and have a starting point for aconversation. There they are likely to ﬁnd that psychologistsand others working on electrical brain stimulation are well-versed in modeling since grant applications to fund suchwork, e.g., to the NIH’s National Institute of Mental Health,often include modeling results.
12
With the concentric sphere model under their belts, stu-
dents can move on to more complicated models wheredetails of the actual geometry of the brain are included such
as the folding pattern of the cerebral cortex (gray matter)
where the bodies of neurons are located, the nerve ﬁbertracks (white matter) upon which action potentials travel
between neurons, the cavities (ventricles) that lie deep in the
brain and are ﬁlled with cerebrospinal ﬂuid, and the collec-tions of nerve cells (basal ganglia) that lie at the base of thebrain and serve as relays for nerve ﬁbers going to (afferents)
and coming from (efferents) the cerebral cortex. In addition
to modeling the brain’s geometry more accurately, advancedmodels, such as that of Ref. 13, address the effects of aniso-
tropic conductivities, the skull’s compact and spongy bone,
and the fact that besides the cerebral cortex, a human headincludes a person’s cerebellum, eyes, and brain stem, and is
supported by neck muscles and the vertebrae of the spinal
column.
The brain’s most important cell type is, of course, the neu-
ron (Fig. 2) with its cell body, dendritic tree for receiving
inputs from other neurons through synapses (both chemical
and electrical), and its nerve ﬁber (axon) for sending outputs(action potentials) to other neurons and to effectors such as
muscles. The billions of neurons and trillions of connections
through synapses provide the brain with its dynamic behav-ior. The dynamics of groups of neurons is itself the subjectof extensive modeling (see, for example, Ref. 14).
More than 100 years ago, Ram /C19on y Cajal, the 1906 recipi-
ent of the Nobel Prize for Medicine, studied the organization
of neurons within the brain and gave us drawings of the typeshown in Fig. 3. Even these drawings are highly simpliﬁed
compared to the actual structure of the brain since they show
the volumes between cells as empty space where in factthose volumes are ﬁlled with even more neurons and with
supporting cells and structures, e.g., glial cells and blood
vessels, in a seemingly chaotic arrangement as revealed inelectron micrographs.
15Today’s models of brain electricity
have a long way to go to reach these levels of detail. To aid
in the journey, a variety of computer programs for solving
264 Am. J. Phys. 91(4), April 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 264 04 October 2023 22:51:11
the relevant electromagnetic ﬁeld problems have been devel-
oped, many of which are open source. Table Isets forth
examples of programs that have been used to study electrical
brain stimulation.16
The charge distributions presented herein were calculated
using the technique the author previously published in thisjournal (Ref. 26) as extended below in Sec. 