INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| FEBRUARY 01 2022
Theoretical and experimental examination of simple coaxial
photonic crystals for undergraduate teaching 
Xubo Guo  
 ; Yingying Liu ; Ying Chang ; Meihong Zhu ; Liuwan Zhang
Am. J. Phys.  90, 152–158 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0059320
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Non-radiative mid-range wireless power transfer: An experiment for senior physics undergraduates
Am. J. Phys.  (August 2018)
Long-range superluminal pulse propagation in a coaxial photonic crystal
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (January 2002)
Noise characterization and modeling of polysilicon emitter bipolar junction transistors at microwave
frequencies
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 1993) 04 October 2023 23:02:34
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
The downloaded PDF for any Note in this section contains all the Notes in this section.
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, and
how they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to theIL&D editor for consideration.
Theoretical and experimental examination of simple coaxial photonic
crystals for undergraduate teaching
Xubo Guo,a)Yingying Liu,Ying Chang, Meihong Zhu, and Liuwan Zhang
Teaching Center for Experimental Physics, Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China
(Received 8 June 2021; accepted 30 September 2021)
A study implementing a coaxial photonic crystal with a simple structure composed of only one type
of coaxial cable is described. The coaxial photonic crystal consists of alternating sections of a single
cable and Nparallel cables, with impedances of ZHandZH=N, respectively. The high mismatch in
impedance at the interfaces enables access to a highly superluminal group velocity with few cables.
An easily realizable method is also presented to measure both the amplitude of transmission and the
phase of the crystal by using an oscilloscope and a function generator. The measurements werevalidated by an advanced vector network analyzer and matched the results of theoretical analysis
based on the transfer matrix method. The experiment only requires electronic components and
equipment that are typically used in undergraduate teaching laboratories.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0059320
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, coaxial photonic crystals have been used
as crystal analogs to study a wide range of effects in atomicand photonic crystals, such as their band structures,1–4dis-
persion relations,1wave localization,1superluminal1,5–8and
slow group velocities,9and nonlinear properties.10A coaxial
photonic crystal generally consists of a number of unit cellsconnected in a row. Each unit cell with a half-wavelength(k=2) is comprised of two coaxial cables with different impe-
dances, but the same electrical length. Mismatches in imped-
ance at the interfaces cause the propagating wave to be
reﬂected by such a structure. The constructive interferenceof multiple reﬂections creates frequency bands at 2 mf
0with
maximal transmission, where mis a positive integer,
f0¼vu=k, and vuis the phase velocity of the electromag-
netic wave in the cables. On the other hand, destructive inter-ference creates band gaps with minimal transmission atð2m/C01Þf
0. Anomalous dispersion, where the effective
refractive index decreases with frequency, occurs within the
band gaps and generates superluminal group velocities. If adefect is introduced into the crystal, a transmission peakappears within the band gaps and leads to strong positive dis-persion and a slow group velocity.
Group velocities up to 3 c, that is, three times the speed of
light in vacuum, have been observed.
1,5The coaxial photonic
crystal presented in Ref. 1consists of 24 5-m-long cables,
with alternating sections of RG58 (50 X) and RG59 (75 X)cables. Their total length is 120 m. A higher mismatch in
impedance allows for a higher, and even negative, groupvelocity.6,7The crystal in Ref. 6uses 17 alternating sections
of RG58 (50 X) cables, each of which is 6.19 m long, and
RG62 (93 X) cables, each of which is 7.97 m long, giving a
total length of 119.5 m. A negative group velocity of /C01.2c
has been observed, which contradicts theoretical analysis, inwhich negative group velocities should not be observed in a
linear, passive photonic crystal.11,12
The measurement of the overall phase shift through a
coaxial photonic crystal is essential for obtaining its effectiverefractive index and group velocity. However, the phase isobtained either by calculation
1or by ﬁrst recording the infor-
mation in the time domain of a pulse with an oscilloscopeand then taking its Fourier transforms.7To the best of our
knowledge, a method to directly measure the phase of acoaxial crystal with an oscilloscope and a function generatorhas not been proposed in the literature.
This study implements a simple coaxial photonic crystal
with only one type of cable. The coaxial photonic crystal iscomprised of alternating sections of a single coaxial cableandNparallel coaxial cables, which causes a high mismatch
in impedance and yields a remarkable superluminal effect.
Furthermore, the phase of the crystal is directly measuredwith an oscilloscope and a function generator. The measuredresults are validated by a precise vector network analyzer(VNA), which can accurately and quickly measure both theamplitudes and phase properties of electrical circuits using
152 Am. J. Phys. 90(2), February 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 152 04 October 2023 23:02:34
swept-frequency test signals. The measured results also
agree well with theoretical results based on the transfermatrix method.
