Interested In
Hawking temperatures for the V aidya and the Reissner-Nordstrom-V aidya black holes
AIP Conference Proceedings  (March 2016)
Energy transport in the V aidya system
J. Math. Phys.  (May 2005)
Exact solutions to the Dirac equation for neutrinos propagating in a particular V aidya background
J. Math. Phys.  (May 1994) 04 October 2023 22:59:49
The Vaidya metric: Expected and unexpected traits of evaporating
black holes
Julius Piesnack and Klaus Kassner
Institut f €ur Physik, Otto-von-Guericke-Universit €at, Magdeburg, Germany
(Received 1 March 2021; accepted 1 September 2021)
The ingoing Vaidya metric is introduced as a model for a non-rotating uncharged black hole
emitting Hawking radiation. This metric is expected to capture the physics of the spacetime forradial coordinates up to a small multiple ð>1Þof the Schwarzschild radius. For larger radii, it will
give an excellent approximation to the spacetime geometry in the case of astrophysical black holes
ðM/C21M
/C12Þ, except at extremely large distances from the horizon (exceeding the cosmic particle
horizon). In the classroom, the model may serve as a ﬁrst exploration of non-stationary
gravitational ﬁelds. Several interesting predictions are developed. First, particles dropped early
enough before complete evaporation of the black hole cross its horizon as easily as with an eternalblack hole. Second, the Schwarzschild radius takes on the properties of an apparent horizon, and
the true event horizon of the black hole is inside of it, because light can escape from the shrinking
apparent horizon. Third, a particle released from rest close enough to the apparent horizon isstrongly repelled and may escape to inﬁnity. An interpretation is given, demonstrating that such a
particle would be able to compete, for a short time, in a race with a photon.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006367
I. INTRODUCTION
Schwarzschild black holes1,2are among the most popular
examples of spacetimes studied in general relativity courses.Their metric is simple, enables a straightforward discussionof the four classical tests of general relativity, and allows
one to explore some strong-ﬁeld effects as well as the con-
cept of an event horizon.
The metric is stationary, so the effects of time-dependent
gravitational ﬁelds are absent. Beyond that, the interestingphenomenon of gravitational repulsion of radially infalling
particles does not arise in the Schwarzschild metric. It hap-
pens for charged spherically symmetric black holes,
described by the Reissner–Nordstr €om metric,
3but only well
inside the event horizon. Some non-stationary metrics turnout to exhibit it in more accessible places.
A simple time-dependent metric is the Vaidya metric,4
describing the exterior of a spherically symmetric mass dis-
tribution that absorbs or emits null dust, i.e., massless par-ticles. While spectacular time-dependent effects may bediscussed in studying the properties of gravitational waves,
5
the Vaidya metric is not devoid of some interesting oneseither.
Note that the Vaidya metric is not purely of academic
interest. It arises in a natural way in phenomenological mod-els of a black hole evaporating by Hawking radiation, an
object that is not fully describable by a stationary metric.
Since Vaidya metrics are models of the spacetime resulting
from Hawking radiation, not of the radiation itself (which ismostly electromagnetic in nature), Hawking radiation will
be hardly touched upon in the main part of this article.
Rather, we will give a discussion of its essential featuresin Sec. 