Items in the Resource Letter below are labeled with the letter E to indicate elementary level or material of
general interest to persons seeking to become informed in the ﬁeld, the letter I to indicate intermediate level or somewhat specialized material, or t he
letter A to indicate advanced or specialized material. No Resource Letter is meant to be exhaustive and complete; in time there may be more than one
Resource Letter on a given subject. A complete list by ﬁeld of all Resource Letters published to date is at the website <http://ajp.dickinson.edu/
Readers/resLetters.html >. Suggestions for future Resource Letters, including those of high pedagogical value, are welcome and should be sent to
Professor Mario Belloni, Editor, AJP Resource Letters, Davidson College, Department of Physics, Box 6910, Davidson, NC 28035; e-mail:mabelloni@davidson.edu.
Resource Letter MDS-1: Mobile devices and sensors
for physics teaching
Mart /C19ınMonteiro
Universidad ORT Uruguay, Mercedes 1451, Montevideo 11100, Uruguay
Arturo C. Mart /C19ıa)
Instituto de F /C19ısica, Universidad de la Rep /C19ublica, Igu /C19a 4225, Montevideo 11200, Uruguay
(Received 29 September 2021; accepted 31 January 2022)
This Resource Letter provides a guide to the literature on teaching experimental physics using
sensors in tablets, smartphones, and some specialized devices. After a general discussion of
hardware (sensors) and software (apps), we present resources for experiments using mobile-device
sensors in many areas of physics education: mechanics, oscillations and waves, optics,electromagnetism, matter, modern physics, and astronomy.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0073317
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been a revolution in the use of cell
phones. In the late 2000s, smartphones appeared in the market
and quickly became extremely popular: About 1 :5/C2109
smartphones were sold in 2020, and the vast majority of phys-
ics students around the world have access to a smartphone.
Smartphones can be a useful experimental tool not only
because they have a relatively powerful processor and canaccess wireless networks but also due to the presence of a
number of built-in sensors (see Table I). Sensors can deter-
mine the orientation of the device, disable the touch screen,
adjust the display’s brightness according to external condi-
tions to save the battery, geolocate the device, monitor theuser’s heart rate, and unlock the device. The set of sensors
included in mobile devices is large and is expected to expand
in the coming years.
The relevance of the sensors goes far beyond those every-
day uses mentioned: In recent years, numerous educational
and scientiﬁc applications have been proposed, includingphysics experiments. As the original intention of sensor man-
ufacturers was not to use these sensors in science or physics
experiments, some effort is needed to transform smartphones
into scientiﬁc instruments. However, the reward for making
this effort is considerable. Even mid-range smartphonesincorporate a broad range of sensors that would otherwise be
difﬁcult to acquire. Since most students already have such a
device, they can be combined with easily available equip-
ment and materials to create a low-cost, compact, multi-
sensor experimental platform with no need for complicatedconnections or setup. Another factor, less objective, is that
students do not consider a smartphone to be a strange or
magical device, since it is part of their daily lives. Whether
or not this fact inﬂuences the learning process is still under
examination.
We might compare smartphones to devices designed spe-
ciﬁcally for the use of instructional laboratory experiments
in physics and science, including the SmartCart
VR(Pasco),
PocketLabVR(Myriad Sensors, Inc.), IOLabVR(MacMillan),
and Go DirectVRSensor Cart (Vernier). These devices share
some capabilities with smartphones but do not offer the tra-
ditional phone functions. In these devices, the selection ofsensors, the connectivity, and the software have been
designed for pedagogy with student-friendly interfaces.
However, these devices are still alien to the student’s experi-ence, as compared to a smartphone. In addition, these devi-
ces must be purchased speciﬁcally for the physics
laboratory, as students will not already own them. There alsoexist several platforms, such as Arduino or BBC mibro:bit
(see Refs. 5,12,14,15, and 16below), that have been
adapted to perform experiments using sensors. Unlike smart-phones in which the set of sensors is predetermined by the
manufacturers, these programmable boards allow one to
choose from a wide range of sensors and modules includingultrasound sensors, ﬂame detectors, infra-red emitters and
receptors, water level sensors, relays, PIR (Passive infra-
red), and metal detectors. We have included a few articlesusing Arduino boards as examples of experiments that could
be accomplished using a combination of Arduino boards and
smartphones.
328 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 328 04 October 2023 23:08:03
Communication with sensors requires speciﬁc software,
known as an app, specially designed to be executed by the
mobile device. Since most of the mobile devices currently
used are based on two operating systems, iOS and Android,
we will discuss the most useful apps running in these operat-
ing systems, but many others also may be useful in speciﬁccircumstances.
This Resource Letter is aimed at physicists and scientists
interested in adapting or performing experiments using
mobile-device sensors to collect real physical data. Other
potential uses of the mobile devices in the classroom, such
as accessing the internet, sharing data among students, inter-
acting with teachers, clicker-like activities, simulations,
among many others, are not considered here. Video analysis
of physical phenomena, which has received a lot of attention
in the recent decades, is also not included in this ResourceLetter. In the selection of references, preference has been
given to papers in which the experiments can be performed
using state-of-the-art software and hardware. Within the
selection criteria, we prioritized articles published in
journals—but we also cite some of the few books already
published—that present experiments with sufﬁcient detail
and clarity that they will be straightforward to implement ina classroom.
The organization of this Resource Letter is as follows. As
the topic is relatively new, there are only a few books thatare cited in Sec. 