IL 01 2022
Simulation led optical design assessments: Emphasizing
practical and computational considerations in an upper
division physics lecture course 
Vincent M. Rossi  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 279–285 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0064138
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Monostatic and Bistatic Backscattering Measurements from the Deep Ocean Bottom
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005)
Nuclear molecules in neutron-rich nuclei
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2018) 04 October 2023 23:06:42
Simulation led optical design assessments: Emphasizing practical
and computational considerations in an upper division physicslecture course
Vincent M. Rossia)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Washburn University, Topeka, Kansas 66621
(Received 20 July 2021; accepted 12 February 2022)
Employing simulation led optical design assessments (SLODAs) in an upper division optics course
provides students with a deeper understanding of optical design, interactions, and devices, while
reinforcing their understanding of computational methods. The upper division optics coursediscussed here did not have a required lab component as would be typical at many institutions.
Therefore, the practical and expanded experiences students gained via SLODA in lieu of a
laboratory experience were particularly crucial in developing advanced student understanding andskills in both optical design and computational applications. SLODA can also supplement a
laboratory-based course with computational skill development. After introducing students to
various computational methods during the early part of the course via scaffolding in-classpreliminary computational activities, students were then assigned more complicated application
based SLODA. This paper details each of the preliminary computational activities and SLODA,
including their implementation and both the optical and computational considerations theseactivities and assessments were designed to introduce. An example SLODA is detailed. A
reﬂection on the implementation of SLODA is provided for those interested in adopting the
curriculum. A list of online resources is given in the Appendix for faculty wishing to implementSLODA. Finally, a sample of the student work submitted is presented and discussed in the journal’s
supplementary material. While success was speciﬁcally found via the implementation of SLODA
in an upper division optics course, the potential exists for adaptation of the simulation led designassessment approach to other practical, design-based courses such as electronics or those within the
engineering disciplines.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0064138
I. INTRODUCTION
The combined emphasis on active learning,1–5computa-
tional,6–9and application based10,11approaches within the
classroom in order to better promote student learning has
motivated the incorporation of simulation led optical design
assessments (SLODA) in the upper division PS 330 Optics
course in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at
Washburn University, a primarily undergraduate institution.
The PS 330 Optics course is a lecture course that does not
have an associated laboratory component, thereby limiting
the practical, application based experience that would nor-
mally be afforded optics students via an associated optical
laboratory curriculum. The instructor was, therefore, moti-
vated to give students in the lecture course practical experi-
ence in optics, independent of a lab curriculum. Simulation
led optical design assessments draw from computational and
optical design skills and incorporate them into a lab-less cur-
riculum in order to expose optics students to many of thepractical and application based skills that they would other-
wise develop via an associated optical laboratory. Instructors
who teach a lab may also ﬁnd that their students could bene-
ﬁt from the opportunity to develop computational skills
while increasing their understanding of the design process.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. A
general overview of the PS 330 Optics course is given in
Sec.