Interested In
The notebooks of W allace C. Sabine
J Acoust Soc Am  (March 1977)
Using scientists' notebooks to foster authentic scientific practices
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2013)
Folding the best bookmark with calculus
Scilight  (April 2023) 04 October 2023 22:51:47
On the bifurcation behavior of a folded notebook page
Chenguang Zhang (张晨光)a)
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Now at Ansys Inc., Lebanon,
New Hampshire 03766
(Received 27 April 2022; accepted 1 February 2023)
We study how a bound notebook page can be folded once so that the page is visible when the notebook
is closed and becomes a bookmark. An add itional practical requirement is that the folded page stays
within the same side of the bind, so that it does not get creased further when one closes the notebook.This simple problem displays a remarkably rich bifurcation behavior, which can be analyzed using
undergraduate calculus. The main ﬁnding is that the optimal way of folding the page depends on the
pages aspect ratio and changes abruptly when the latter exceeds the critical value of 1.207 11.This behavior also resembles a ﬁrst-order phase transition in therm odynamics despite its geometric
origin.
VC2023 Author(s) .All article content, except where otherwise noted, is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0097340
I. INTRODUCTION
Folding, as a general method of transforming geometries,
is found everywhere. Clothes, bi-fold doors, umbrellas, air-
bags, solar panels, and wings of insects and birds1,2are just
some common examples. Folding allows a thin object to bestored compactly while remaining easily deployable, ortransformed into structures with new capabilities (e.g.,
origami).
In mathematics, origami, a slightly constrained form of
folding, has been formalized into an axiomatic system.
3
Analysis and computation aid in the creation of novel ori-gami designs.4Interestingly, folding has a mathematical
capability that outperforms compass-and-straightedge con-
struction and can be used to solve classical problems such as“angle trisection” or “doubling the cube.”5,6
Folding is also common in physical sciences. A prominent
example is the protein folding problem, where one would
like to establish the 3D protein structure from an amino acid
sequence alone. Recently, deep learning allowed for a majorbreakthrough in answering this question.7Interestingly, fold-
ing (together with stretching) is also a useful concept in
mixing of highly viscous ﬂuids. The diverse folding mecha-
nisms, including mechanical, capillary, thermal, and chemi-cal folding, can beneﬁt a wide range of micro-scaleapplications.
8,9Back at the ofﬁce, a violently folded
(or crumpled) piece of paper has remarkable physical insight
buried in its crease network.10,11
Admittedly, the mathematical, physical, or biological
study of folds is full of surprises. This work presents onesimple problem, in which folding a notebook page exhibits
an interesting bifurcation behavior. Given a pocket notebook
of length 1 in the xdirection and lin the ydirection (Fig. 1),
a folded page can extend beyond the side bounds of itsunfolded state, remaining visible when the notebook is
closed and thus serving as a bookmark. Then, what is the
optimal way to fold the page? Although preferences vary, weassume in this paper that the optimal fold maximizes thebookmark length e(Fig. 1), which is the length by which the
page extends beyond its unfolded width along the xaxis. In
addition, the top edge of the page should not be torn offaconstraint similar to the one experienced by birds and insectswhen folding their wings due to the joint between the wings
and body. Aside from this ﬁrst constraint, the folded page
should not extend past the top edge of the notebook, or itwill be creased further when closing the notebook. This is
the second constraint.
We will begin by considering the ﬁrst constraint alone and
then solve the complete problem, using only undergraduate
calculus. This paper concludes by proposing several possible
directions for future explorations.
