Interested In
Portable wall-putti applying machine
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2020)
Elastic and viscous properties of Silly Putty
Am. J. Phys.  (October 2012)
Elastic Properties of Plasticine, Silly Putty , and T ennis Strings
Phys. T each.  (December 2012) 04 October 2023 23:00:14
Vertical quasistatic Poiseuille flow: Theory and experiment
Don S. Lemons
Bethel College, North Newton, Kansas 67117
Trevor C. Lipsombe
Catholic University of America, Washington, DC 20064
Rickey J. Faehl
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico 87545
(Received 4 May 2021; accepted 24 August 2021)
As a viscous ﬂuid drains from the bottom of a wide-mouthed reservoir through a narrow vertical
tube, the symmetric ﬂow within the tube, known as Poiseuille ﬂow, is quickly established. Since
the pressure provided by the ﬂuid in the reservoir changes slowly in time, the ﬂow is quasistatically
time dependent. Our theoretical model of this process relates the time dependence of the height ofthe ﬂuid in the reservoir to the dimensions of the tube and the kinetic viscosity of the ﬂuid. We
construct an apparatus from inexpensive and easily procured materials (plastic containers, steel
straws, glue, adhesive putty, and a supply of pure glycerin) in order to test our model and ﬁnd goodagreement between the theory and the experiment.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006245
I. INTRODUCTION
Viscosity quantiﬁes the tendency of water and other ﬂuids
to minimize transverse velocity gradients in their ﬂow.Water, olive oil, honey, and molasses are viscous in increas-ing degree, and their increasing viscosity increases their ten-dency to ﬂow in bulk rather than chaotically or in multiple
streams. We can see the effects of viscosity in our dailylives, usually without noticing them.
The concept of viscosity was developed over the ﬁrst half
of the 19th century
1and culminated in George G. Stokes’s
formalization of the Navier–Stokes equation in 1845.2
Stokes even derived the radially parabolic velocity proﬁleinside a cylindrical tube, as shaped by viscosity, that is nowcalled Poiseuille ﬂow —but without a no-slip condition at the
tube wall. Stokes was unaware of the empirical investiga-tions of pipe ﬂow made only a few years earlier by JeanLeonard Marie Poiseuille (1797–1860).
Poiseuille performed a series of experiments in the late
1830s and early 1840s, in which water was pushed throughsmall-diameter, horizontally oriented, glass tubes. In thisway, Poiseuille discovered the effect of viscosity on pipe
ﬂow, even if he did not fully quantify this effect.
3At about
the same time, the German hydraulic engineer GotthilfHeinrich Ludwig Hagen (1797–1894) performed similar, ifless extensive, experiments. In this paper, we describe thephysics that underlies Poiseuille ﬂow and the version ofPoiseuille and Hagen’s experiments we created with easilyprocured materials.
Today we understand the physics of pipe ﬂow better than
did Poiseuille and Hagen. However, most importantly, wehave access to the ﬂuid glycerin whose viscosity, some300–3000 times greater than that of water (depending ontemperature), allows us to avoid using the extremely small-
diameter glass or brass tubes employed in mid-19th century.
Glycerin is an odorless, tasteless, transparent, nontoxic, andinexpensive ﬂuid that is used to make soap and moisturizer.
In our experiment, glycerin drains from a clear plastic
container with vertical walls through a vertically orientedsteel tube, marketed as a reusable straw, ﬁtted to a hole inthe reservoir bottom. We seal the interface between the straw
and the edge of the hole with glue in order to eliminate leaks.
We stabilize the relatively heavy steel straws with adhesive
putty in order to keep their orientation vertical. The simpleexperiment we propose, analyze, and implement is opti-mized, not necessarily for accuracy, but rather to illuminatephysical and ﬂuid dynamical concepts.
According to our calculations, the time required for the
ﬂuid to drain from the reservoir through the straw is directlyproportional to the kinematic viscosity /C23of the glycerin and
to the area Aof the ﬂuid surface in the reservoir, inversely
proportional to the fourth power of the straw radius R, and
related in a simple way to the straw length Land the initial
height Hof the ﬂuid above the entrance to the straw. Modern
capillary viscometers, of which ours could be considered a
type, usually have more complicated geometries,
4see Fig. 1
for our geometry.
