Interested In
Preliminary group classification of equations vtt=f (x,vx)vxx+g(x,vx)
J. Math. Phys.  (November 1991)
Histotripsy and metastasis: Assessment in a renal VX-2 rabbit tumor model
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2012)
Effects of Heat and Ultrasound on Vx ‐ 2 Carcinoma in Bones of Rabbits: A Preliminary Report
J Acoust Soc Am  (July 2005) 04 October 2023 23:02:16
Subtle features in projectile motion with quadratic drag found through
Taylor series expansions
Antonio Corvoa)
Applied Research Solutions, Beavercreek, Ohio 45440, and School of Systems and Logistics, Air Force
Institute of Technology, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio 45433
(Received 6 April 2021; accepted 21 December 2021)
Many attempts have been made at ﬁnding the trajectory for the projectile problem with quadratic
drag. However, no complete analytical solution is possible due to the nonlinear coupling between
differential equations describing the horizontal ( x) and vertical ( y) velocity components that
result in the ﬁnal trajectory solution, y¼f(x). Over the years, a number of approximate analytical
methods, including Taylor series expansions, have been applied to the problem. However,
whereas prior works expanded Vxby assuming Vx¼Vx(t), the expansion here is based on the
faster converging 1/ Vx(t), whose reciprocal better captures the monotonically decreasing nature
ofVx.#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009227
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the oldest physics problems in human history is at
what angle and how fast something has to be thrown in order
to hit a target of interest. Humans mastering those tech-
niques, from hunting to warfare, were more likely to hit theirprey and be victorious in a battle. Sports, in many of theirvarious forms, encompass a wide range of different methodsto transfer energy to a projectile in order to hit a target, forminganother area where a substantial amount of effort has beenplaced in understanding the nuances of projec tile motion.
1–3
Thus, in all of its applications, it is not surprising that projectile
motion has played major roles in the formal development ofdynamics and even in digital computer design starting withENIAC, the ﬁrst programmable, electronic, general-purpose
digital computer initially developed for the United States
Army to calculate artillery ﬁring tables.
4
In physics education, projectile motion may be studied with
the use of a lab-scale catapult. A typical trajectory, as shownin Fig. 1, begins at the origin (0, 0) in the ascent phase of seg-
ment I when the catapult releases the projectile with a givenlaunch angle and velocity. The projectile rises to a peak at(x
p,yp) and then returns to the plane of origin ( xr,0 )i nt h e
descent phase of segment 