I. INTRODUCTION
The far infrared portion of the spectrum enables the deter-
mination of the temperature of remote objects without hav-
ing to place a probe directly in contact with the object. This
is possible because the blackbody radiation curve of bodieshaving a temperature up to about 400 K peaks at a wave-
length of 7.2 lm, which is in the far infrared range.
The recent advent of inexpensive infrared (IR) cameras,
such as the Seek Compact Pro1and FLIR ONE,2provides
the opportunity to investigate this range of the electromag-
netic spectrum in introductory physics or astronomy labs.While thermal imagers were available for $2,000 in the early
2000s, devices in that price range typically used sensors of
120/C2120 pixels that could only record still images. Today,
a 320 /C2240-pixels imager with video capability can be pur-
chased for $400. The Seek Compact Pro camera is speciﬁed
as having a temperature range from /C040
/C14C to 330/C14C and
with a resolution of 0.1/C14C. It is sensitive to infrared radiation
wavelengths between 7.5 and 14 lm and has a ﬁxed IR lens
with a focal length of 6.6 mm. At this level of performance,
new possibilities for classroom use appear. These cameras
provide unique opportunities for classroom demonstrationsand laboratory activities and have been used in physics,3–7
chemistry,8–10and biology,11but, to our knowledge, they
have yet to be employed in general education astronomy
courses. While there is no shortage of applications for these
IR cameras, one that is readily feasible is their use in ama-teur astrophotography.
The beneﬁt of adding this new spectral window to
introductory astronomy courses is similar to its beneﬁt in
professional astronomy: the appearance of objects
changes in the different spectral regions, as can be seen
in NASA’s Solar Mission’s webpages for instance, givingcomplementary information on their composition and
characteristics.
12We contend that there is educational
value in a hands-on demonstration of this fact, but practi-cally speaking, most undergraduate students have access
to a limited range of wavelengths for astronomical
observations.
Many campuses may own or have access to visible-light
observatories or smaller portable telescopes; a smaller num-
ber may have a radio telescope. Coupling a commercial IRdetector to a telescope, therefore, helps students realize that
different spectral ranges tell different but complementary
stories.
In this paper, we show how a simple IR camera, connected
to a smartphone, can be placed at the observation point of a
telescope to give qualitative access to the IR appearance of
various celestial bodies.
Questions that can be sparked by the use of such IR tele-
scopes include: Why does Venus show phases in an ordinarytelescope but is always “full” in the IR? Why can one see
Mars through an IR telescope, but not Jupiter and Saturn?
Why does the Moon look so different in the IR compared tothe visible range, as is vividly illustrated during a lunareclipse? The contrast between the appearance of celestial
objects illuminated by the solar blackbody radiation and the
blackbody radiation they themselves emit opens the door todiscussions about some of the typical topics in an introduc-tory planetary astronomy course. For example, the ﬁrst
semester of a two-semester course in introductory astronomy
is typically concerned with basic physical principles of orbitsand the electromagnetic spectrum as applied to our solar sys-
tem. Aside from the Sun, nothing in our solar system produ-
ces visible light from its own blackbody radiation. Everyother object viewable with an inexpensive telescope reﬂectsthe Sun’s visible light but produces its own electromagnetic
radiation, primarily in the infrared. Telescopes, such as the
Hubble Space Telescope, which primarily detects visiblelight, excel at seeing distant stars, but the light reﬂected byextrasolar planets is typically dwarfed by the light emitted
by their primary stars. In this respect, the infrared region pro-
vides superior viewing opportunities since a planet’s radia-tion can be expected to peak in the IR while that of their hoststars does not.
After a short reminder of the types of visible telescopes
that are commonly employed in astronomy (Sec. 