Ismael Abdourahamane ; Elsa Caplain ; Samuel Der ; Antoine Jallon ; Inés Khoutami ;
Amir Loucif ; Emil Marinov ; Bruno Andreotti
Am. J. Phys.  90, 826–832 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0064826
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Comparison of tidal breathing and reiterant speech breathing using whole body plethysmography
J Acoust Soc Am  (October 2014)
Breathing patterns of conversation partners
J Acoust Soc Am  (March 2023)
Frequency responses of the breathing sound signals
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023) 04 October 2023 23:20:24
Turbulent dispersion of breath by the wind
Florian Poydenot,a)Ismael Abdourahamane, Elsa Caplain, Samuel Der, Antoine Jallon,
In/C19esKhoutami, Amir Loucif, Emil Marinov, and Bruno Andreottib)
Laboratoire de Physique de l’ /C19Ecole Normale Sup /C19erieure, ENS, Universit /C19e PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Universit /C19e,
Universit /C19e Paris Cit /C19e, F-75005 Paris, France
(Received 27 July 2021; accepted 4 July 2022)
The pioneering work of Taylor on the turbulent dispersion of aerosols is one century old and
provides an interesting way to introduce both diffusive processes and turbulence at an
undergraduate level. Low mass particles transported by a turbulent ﬂow exhibit a Brownian-likemotion over time scales larger than the velocity correlation time. Aerosols and gases are, therefore,
subjected to an effective turbulent diffusion at large length scales. However, the case of a source of
pollutant much smaller than the integral scale is not completely understood. Here, we presentexperimental results obtained by undergraduate students in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic. The dispersion of a fog of oil droplets by a turbulent ﬂow is studied in a wind tunnel
designed for pedagogical purposes. It shows a ballistic-like regime at short distance, followed byTaylor’s diffusive-like regime, suggesting that scale-free diffusion by the turbulent cascade process
is bypassed. Measurements show that the dispersion of CO
2emitted when breathing in a natural,
indoor air ﬂow is not isotropic but rather along the ﬂow axis. The transverse spread is ballistic-like,leading to the concentration decaying as the inverse-squared distance to the mouth. The experiment
helps students understand the role of ﬂuctuations in diffusive processes and in turbulence. A
Langevin equation governing aerosol dispersion based on a single correlation time allows us tomodel the airborne transmission risk of pathogens, indoors and outdoors. The results obtained in
this study have been used to provide public health policy recommendations to prevent transmission
in shopping malls.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0064826
I. INTRODUCTION
The challenge of offering experimental physics courses
online during the COVID-19 pandemic motivated the fol-
lowing question: can students learn experimental techniques
during lockdowns while simultaneously working to reduce
viral transmission risk indoors? A group of students studying
experimental physics at our university worked on several
projects to reduce the risk of airborne transmission of SARS-
CoV-2, including the ﬁltration efﬁciency of face masks, thecalibration of CO
2sensors using candles or dry ice in a
closed transparent box, and the analysis of epidemic data.
We report here the work on a project to understand the dis-
persion of viral particles both indoors and outdoors. This
project has required a detailed understanding of both diffu-
sion processes and turbulent ﬂows.
However, turbulence is not an easy subject to teach. At the
undergraduate level, topics in ﬂuid mechanics mainly
include hydrostatics, potential laminar ﬂows, and viscous
ﬂows. The concept of turbulence appears when teaching thedrag force exerted on a moving spherical solid as a function
of the Reynolds number (see, e.g., Ref. 1). In this approach,
one of the fundamental aspects of turbulence, namely, space
and time ﬂuctuations, is bypassed. Here, we show that turbu-
lence can be taught by considering the dispersion of particles
in a regime where concentration is low enough that it acts as
a passive scalar ﬁeld; that is, the concentration has no
dynamical effect on the ﬂow. We treat this dispersion theo-
retically in Sec. 