IEWS| MAY 01 2022
Weirdness! What Fake Science and the Paranormal T ell Us
About the Nature of Science 
Weirdness! What Fake Science and the Paranormal T ell Us About the Nature of Science . . Taner Edis.  279 pp.  Pitchstone
Publishing , Durham, NC ,  2021 . Price: $16.95 (paper). ISBN 97816343121 10.
David Kyle Johnson
Am. J. Phys.  90, 397–400 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0086215
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Lacunary statistical convergence in a paranormed space
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 2012)
On the paranormed binomial sequence spaces
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2018)
Some new paranormed sequence spaces and core theorems
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2014) 04 October 2023 23:09:25
BOOK REVIEWS
The downloaded PDF for any Review in this section contains all the Reviews in this section.
Craig F. Bohren, Editor
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802; mailing address: P.O. Box 887, Boalsburg, PA 16827; bohren@meteo.psu.edu
Weirdness! What Fake Science and the Paranormal Tell
Us About the Nature of Science. Taner Edis. 279 pp.
Pitchstone Publishing, Durham, NC, 2021. Price: $16.95
(paper). ISBN 9781634312110. (David Kyle Johnson,
Reviewer.)
Given its subtitle, I expected something different from
Weirdness! . I teach logic and critical thinking primarily by
teaching students how to think about weird things. Schick andVaughn’s How to Think About Weird Things is my primary
text.
1Because Edis also teaches a class on weird things, I
expected case studies in weirdness, followed by examinations,ultimate debunkings, and then reﬂections on what the process
teaches us about the nature of science. “Investigating ghosts
teaches us the value of simplicity. Debunking conspiracy the-ories teaches us about the irrationality of ad hoc reasoning.”
But that’s not what Weirdness! is.
Instead, it is loosely organized general reﬂections on
what he has concluded about science (and many other mat-
ters) through t eaching his class. Also interspersed are seem-
ingly non-sequitur ﬁctional stories about things like ascientist who ﬂipped coins that always came up heads or awoman who was driven mad after gaining omniscience. As
such, it’s a bit difﬁcult to follow. The purpose or thesis of
chapters is often not clear until the last paragraph (if at all),and the reader often struggles to divine the relevance of the
ﬁctional stories (although, some readers might ﬁnd this
fun).
That said, he gets a lot right. For example, the fact that
ghosts don’t exist, that conspiracy theories are bunk, that
UFOs aren’t real, that near-death experiences are a result ofneurological activity, that alternative medicine doesn’t work
and is harmful, and that mystical experiences don’t justify
religious beliefs, are all communicated in one way or anotherthroughout the book. Edis is a good scientist who has never
been fooled into thinking some weird thing is real when it’s
not.
What’s more, although not mentioned by name, he offers
a solid critique of methodological naturalism, the idea that
(because of its approach and philosophical underpinnings)science can investigate only natural phenomena, and thus
can’t conﬁrm or rule out the existence of the supernatural. In
reality, if ghosts or psychic powers were real, their existencecould be revealed by scientiﬁc testing; and that it hasn’t is
adequate justiﬁcation that such things don’t exist.
Methodological naturalism may be an apologist’s way tomake the religious more comfortable with science—
“Science by its nature doesn’t deal with the supernatural, so
it can’t disprove it”—but it’s not an accurate description ofwhat science is (or can do). As Edis says about the idea that
science and religion are in separate domains and so cannot
possibly conﬂict—what is also known as Stephen J. Gould’snon-overlapping magisteria thesis
2—“Separating the spheres
of science and religion is useful for keeping the peace, but itis intellectually dubious.” (p. 110)
Edis does not, however, think that there is one, deﬁning,
scientiﬁc method. He rightly points out that falsiﬁcation isnot everything in science, and that the classic “hypothesize,
predict, test, repeat” articulation of the scientiﬁc method is
grossly inadequate. (I, myself, have elaborated on this.)
3
Indeed, science’s ﬂexibility is what makes it able to investi-
gate supernatural claims. But this is also where Edis gets a
few things wrong.
To prove his point about falsiﬁability, he compares (and
essentially equates) how creationists excuse away evidence
against creationism (e.g., the devil planted the fossils to testour faith) to the way that scientists have defended their cur-
rent theories about gravity: “Those distant galaxies must
not move as our current gravitational theories predictbecause they contain matter we cannot see (i.e., dark
matter).” But there is a huge difference between making a
fundamentally untestable assumption (devil fossils) to savea theory that had no good evidence in the ﬁrst place (crea-
tionism) and making a theoretically testable assumption
(dark matter) to preserve a theory that has vast explanatory
power and is supported by centuries of evidence (gravita-
tional theory). The former is called making up “ ad hoc
excuses” and demonstrates desperation and irrationality.
The latter does not.
Moreover, while Edis is certainly right that scientiﬁc rea-
soning looks very different and uses different tools, in differ-
ent ﬁelds and contexts for different purposes (and he rightly
identiﬁes what my colleagues in the history department do asa kind of science), he is wrong that science does not have an
underlying method. As Ernan McMullin argued in The
Inference that Makes Science , scientiﬁc reasoning is, at its
base, inference to the best explanation.
4In fact, Edis unwit-
tingly acknowledges this on page 119. “When we ask about
the nature of science or probe what might be wrong withsome weirdness, we do something much like a science of
science—an explanation of how good explanations work.”
If, in doing a science of science (trying to ﬁgure out whatscience is), we are trying to ﬁgure out what makes explana-
tions good, it must be that science is an effort to ﬁnd the best
explanation.
Still, Edis is on the right track. Inference to the best expla-
nation, as a method, incorporates all different kinds of rea-
soning—double blinded tests, bayesianism, carefulobservation, avoidance of formal and informal fallacy,
deduction, etc.—and won’t look exactly the same every
time. Although it does generally appeal to the samecriteria—what Schick and Vaughn identify as testability
(i.e., falsiﬁability), fruitfulness (i.e., successful prediction),
scope (i.e., explanatory power), simplicity (i.e., parsimony),
397 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 397 04 October 2023 23:09:25
and conservatism (i.e., how much it aligns with already
established theories)5—in different circumstances, certain of
those criteria will be more important, and certain kinds of
evidence and reasoning will be more relevant. Nevertheless,inference to the best explanation is a single method that canbe articulated and taught.
Consider an analogy that would ﬁt well in Edis’ book.
Science is like building a house. There are all different waysof going about it, and all different kinds of tools that one
might need while doing it—and in certain circumstances
(doing the plumbing) certain tools will be used more thanothers. But that doesn’t mean that there isn’t a method forbuilding houses (that requires a certain “housebuilders tool
kit”).
Edis also makes many astute observations, like why those
in the practical sciences (engineers, nurses, and doctors),
who use science (and technology) to accomplish speciﬁc
tasks, are more apt to believe in pseudoscience and otherfalse weird things. They more often (wrongly) think of sci-ence as a collection of facts, not (rightly) as a method for dis-
covering the truth about the world. Consequently, they often
only know how to use the kinds of scientiﬁc reasoning appli-cable to their own ﬁeld and do not know how to apply scien-
tiﬁc reasoning more broadly. (This accounts for the
frustrations of a colleague of mine, who regularly complainsthat too many of his graduating chemistry majors still believein things like Bigfoot.)
Weirdness! also gave me a new appreciation for why cer-
tain people refuse to think about weirdness: the intellectualand social cost is too high. To understand arguments for why
the belief in Jesus’ resurrection is both historically and scien-
tiﬁcally illegitimate, one would have to invest hours ofresearch about the historicity and authorship of the Bible, theevidence for and against the resurrection, and an understand-
ing of how reasoning about past events functions. That’s a
lot of work. And what’s the payoff? For many, it seems to beostracism from friends, family, and community. No wonderpeople close their ears. (But if you are interested, see my
article “Inference to the Best Explanation and Rejecting the
Resurrection.”)
6
There are shortcuts through that kind of cognitive load:
you can just listen to the experts. But as Edis again acutely
observes, not only can experts sometimes be wrong(although, for the layperson, it is still rational to listen to
them even when they might be wrong), relying on experts
also comes with its own cognitive costs. It takes time andeffort to ﬁgure out who the relevant experts are and whethersomeone is speaking outside their ﬁeld of expertise. Is there
a consensus, or is there genuine disagreement among the
experts? Although this takes much less work than doing yourown research, it’s not easy.
It’s in this context that Edis makes the useful distinction
between instrumental rationality and reﬂective rationality.Instrumental rationality considers the social and cognitivecosts of true belief. Will accepting the truth make life less
comfortable? Will it cost you friends or ostracize you from
family? How much time and cognitive effort will you haveto spend to discover it? If the cost is too high, instrumentalrationality would suggest the quest for truth is not worth it.
Reﬂective rationality, however, ignores all that. It demands
dedication to truth no matter the cost. Both can be rational,
Edis argues, but while he seems to favor reﬂective rationality
in most situations himself, he makes clear that it is not for
everyone (p. 171), and even says that “a devotion to truthabove every other interest would be a form of fanaticism.”
(p. 222).
While I am certainly sensitive to the fact that the neces-
sary time and cognitive effort to seek the truth is not avail-
able to everyone (and seeking the truth on all matters is
impossible), I hesitate to embrace the idea that the social
costs of the truth can be a good reason to ignore it. Not only
do I think that the lessons of Plato’s cave allegory hithome—being duped into believing false things about the
nature of the world is an objectively pitiful state to be in—
but the allegory that Edis tells before ultimately defending
instrumental rationality is ethically problematic. It
describes members of a ﬁctional nation state embracing itsrevisionist history (a history fed to them by their govern-
ment and society which preserves the notion of their
nation’s superiority) because the social costs of embracing
the truth are too high. This, it seems, echoes the concerns of
those who complain about U.S. history courses that don’twhitewash the truth about the United States’ numerous
moral crimes (e.g., how it treated natives, Africans, and
immigrants).
7It seems only people who want to repeat
those crimes would object to studying them; yet the need to
be instrumentally rational could be used to defend theirobjections. Or to put my point more simply: the social costs
of rejecting Nazism were high in 1930s Germany; it was
instrumentally rational to embrace it; the social costs of not
doing so were high. That didn’t make it morally acceptable
to do so.
Edis might respond by suggesting that there are no moral
facts. “Science can’t deliver hard moral facts, because there
are no such facts” (p. 175). He even decries those who haveraised moral concerns about some of his works (on how
Muslims distort history) as “moralists.” “It’s the blasted mor-
alists who ruin everything with their moral panics and witch
hunts and thought police” (p. 178). While I think the com-
plaints about his research were overblown, his complaintshere about “moralists” rhyme a bit too much with complaints
about “virtue signaling,” a term used by those on the far-
right (about whom Edis complains) to dismiss genuine moral
concerns.
8What’s more, Edis seems unaware that, despite
professing there to be no moral facts, he seemingly lodgesmany moral complaints throughout the book (not the least of
which, against the “moralists” themselves and against those
on the far right). That’s the problem with moral nihilism;
you can’t even consistently celebrate that the Allies won
WW