Interested In
Theoretical characteristics of the bound states of M-X complexes ( M = Cu , Ag, and Au, and X = He , Ne,
and Ar)
J. Chem. Phys.  (December 2009)
Micromagnetic simulation of thermal ripple in thin films: “Roller-coaster” visualization
Journal of Applied Physics  (May 2003)
Is It More Thrilling to Ride at the Front or the Back of a Roller Coaster?
The Physics T eacher  (December 2007) 04 October 2023 22:51:54
The one-dimensional potential energy function that is analogous
to a two-dimensional track
Todd K. Timberlakea)and Robert Valentin Mbenoun Mahendb)
Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Geology, Berry College, Mount Berry, Georgia 30149-5004
(Received 27 May 2022; accepted 29 December 2022)
When learning about potential energy functions, students are sometimes told that the potential
energy function is analogous to that of a particle sliding along a frictionless roller coaster track orwire conﬁned to a vertical plane with peaks and valleys of the track corresponding to unstable and
stable equilibrium points. However, motion along a track with height z(x) is a constrained two-
dimensional motion, not a one-dimensional motion, so the exact nature of this analogy may beunclear. We show that the horizontal motion of a point mass sliding along a frictionless track z(x)
and subject to a uniform gravitational ﬁeld is equivalent to the motion of a particle in one
dimension characterized by an “analogous potential energy” function U
EðxÞ, which generally
depends on the total energy of the system (and thus on the initial conditions). We derive a general
expression for UEðxÞin terms of z(x) and the total energy and show that the equilibrium points of
the actual potential energy UðxÞ¼mgzðxÞare also static equilibrium points for UEðxÞwith the
same stability. However, UEðxÞmay have additional dynamic equilibrium points that are not
present for U(x). As an example, we derive UEðxÞfor a double well track and determine the period
of oscillations on that track. The results show that in general a single track corresponds tomany different analogous potential energy functions, each with a different value for the total
energy.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0100950
I. INTRODUCTION
In undergraduate mechanics courses, students learn how
to use the potential energy function U(x) to analyze the
motion of a particle subject to conservative forces. Thepotential energy function can be used to ﬁnd the force onthe particle, the particle’s speed as a function of position, theequilibrium points of the system and their stability, and eventhe period of oscillations around a stable equilibrium point.To help students understand the connection between thepotential energy function and the particle’s motion, instruc-tors and textbooks sometime make an analogy between thepotential energy of a particle moving in one dimension andthe potential energy of a particle sliding along a frictionlessroller coaster track or wire that is conﬁned to a vertical planeand has the same shape as the potential energy function.
1–4
In other words, students are taught to think of the motion ofa particle in one dimension in a system with a potentialenergy function U(x) as analogous to the motion of a particle
sliding along a frictionless track with height z(x) such that
UðxÞ¼mgzðxÞ.
How well, though, does this analogy hold? A particle
moving along the track z(x) is moving in both the x- and z-
directions, not just the x-direction, so clearly there is a differ-
ence. Because the particle is constrained to move on thetrack, it is possible to reduce the problem to an equation ofmotion that involves only xand its time derivatives.
However, the x-motion for the particle moving along the
track is notthe same as the motion of a particle moving in
1D with potential energy UðxÞ¼mgzðxÞ.
In this paper, we show that this motion is equivalent to 1D
motion subject to an analogous potential energy functionU
EðxÞ. This function generally includes the total energy ( E)
as a parameter, so, unlike a normal potential energy function,the analogous potential energy function (APEF) depends onthe initial conditions for the system. Thus, motion along thetrack z(x) is not equivalent to motion in 1D with potential
energy U(x) but rather is equivalent to motion with one of a
family of potential energy functions U
EðxÞparameterized by
total energy. Once the APEF has been found, it can be usedin the same ways that an ordinary potential energy functionis used, but only for a speciﬁc total energy. A change in thetotal energy leads to a change in the APEF also.
In Sec. 