Interested In
A classical analogy for quantum band formation
Am. J. Phys.  (August 2018)
Second-order superintegrable systems in conformally flat spaces. V . Two- and three-dimensional quantum
systems
J. Math. Phys.  (September 2006)
Classical Analogs of a Diatomic Chain
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2010) 04 October 2023 23:01:36
A classical analog for defects in quantum band formation
Paolo Francisco, Tadan Cobb, and Shawn A. Hilbert
Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Geology, Berry College, Mount Berry, Georgia 30149
Scott Carr
Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Geology, Berry College, Mount Berry, Georgia 30149 and
Department of Physics and Engineering Science, Coastal Carolina University, Conway, South Carolina 29528
(Received 3 September 2020; accepted 9 November 2021)
When many individual atoms come together to form a solid, their interaction splits their electronic
energy levels to form continuous bands separated by forbidden energy ranges known as band gaps.
Introducing defects in a solid results in new electron energy levels that may lie inside the
bandgaps. The presence of these defect levels is the heart of the semiconductor-based devices thatplay a signiﬁcant role in the modern world. Quantum mechanics provides the best description of
interacting atoms. However, band formation is not unique to small-scale atomic interactions but
rather is a result of the wave-nature of Schr €odinger’s equation, which governs quantum mechanics.
Using oscillations in a mass-spring system, we present a table-top, classical analog to the quantum
system illustrating how defects in a one-dimensional lattice produce changes to the band structure.
A pair of masses connected by a spring plays the role of a single atom. Interactions between“atoms” are introduced with weak coupling springs producing two distinct frequency bands from
the translational and fundamental modes. Defects are introduced by altering an oscillator pair’s
total mass or internal spring constant. We provide the theoretical groundwork and experimentalveriﬁcation of the model along with a discussion of the value and limitations of the model as a
macroscopic tool to visualize the microscopic world.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009053
I. INTRODUCTION
Doped semiconductors are an essential class of materials
in the modern world. They form the basis of computational
technology, energy-efﬁcient lighting in the form of LEDs,green energy production in the form of solar panels, and awide array of sensors including camera CCDs and radiationdetection chips.
1,2While the electronic applications of these
materials are important, it is valuable to understand themechanisms that give doped semiconductors their unique
electronic properties, especially as new doping methods are
constantly being explored.3In order to achieve this, one
must examine the band structure of semiconductors andobserve the effects of charge-carrying defects on that bandstructure.
In a single atom, bound electrons are restricted to occupy
one of many energy levels. Because the energy spacingof these levels is determined primarily by the nucleus, identi-cal atoms have levels with the same energy. When two iden-
tical atoms come sufﬁciently close to one another, identical
energy levels split to form two levels in the place of one. Asthe number of interacting atoms increases, as in crystallinesolids, the level splitting continues, producing as manyenergy levels as there are atoms. When the number of atomsbecomes large enough, the energy levels from the singleatom have split so many times that the energy differencebetween the levels becomes negligible compared to typical
thermal energy, effectively forming continuous energy bands
separated by bandgaps.
4
Semiconductors are a class of materials that have rela-
tively narrow bandgaps, typically on the order of 1 eV.5The
number of electrons in the material is such that, at zero tem-perature, the band below the gap, known as the valenceband, is completely ﬁlled with electrons, while the bandabove the gap, known as the conduction band, contains no
electrons. The absence of an electron is known as a hole, so
it can be said that the conduction band is fully occupied with
holes.
Doping is the intentional introduction of defects—atoms
of a different element or isotope—into a crystal to alter the
material’s band structure.
6Because the defect is not identical
to the other atoms in the material, its electronic energy levels
are distinct, and interactions with the crystal do not produceenergy level splitting in the same way. Instead, the interac-
tions produce new electron energy levels, which are often
outside of the energy bands of the undoped material.7These
new levels are referred to as defect levels, since they result
from the addition of defects into the material. In materials
used for practical applications, defects are chosen so that
these levels lie in close proximity to an energy band, at eithera slightly higher or a lower energy, so that electrons or holes
can be excited to the energy levels of the dopant at room
temperature.
Defects are classiﬁed based on the relative position of the
defect level within the bandgap. If the defect levels are near
the valence band, they effectively contribute holes to the sys-
tem and the corresponding atoms are known as p-type
defects. If the defect levels are near the conduction band,they contribute electrons to the crystal and the dopants are
known as n-type defects.
8The relative number of p- and n-
type defects plays a key role in the material’s electrical and
even magnetic properties.9,10
The energy of the defect levels is related to, but not
entirely determined by, the intrinsic properties of the doping
atoms. For instance, when silicon is doped with antimony or
phosphorous atoms, defect levels are created with energies39 and 44 meV above the valence band, respectively. In both
semiconductors, the defect state produced by antimony is at
103 Am. J. Phys. 90(2), February 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 103 04 October 2023 23:01:36
a lower energy than phosphorous, preserving a relative order
of the defect energy states. If the defect energy levels were
identical to those of the single atom levels, the energy differ-ence between levels of different atoms should be constant.
However, the separation of these energy levels is different in
different semiconductors, indicating that the energy level
due to the presence of the defect cannot be the same as the
defect atom’s energy levels. While the energy of the defect
level is related to the defect’s single atom energy levels, they
are not the same due to the bonding that takes place in the
crystal. All this emphasizes that the new energy levels in a
doped semiconductor illustrate a collective phenomenon.
The mechanism determining the defect level energies in
an electronic band gap—a purely quantum phenomenon—
can be reproduced in an analogous classical system. We
have previously shown that oscillators—in our case, pairs of
masses connected by a stiff spring—can model atoms. When
a large number of such oscillators are coupled by weaker
springs, the spectrum of resonance frequencies mimics the
structure of energy bands in a crystal.11In this paper, we
extend the analogy to model doping in semiconductors by
introducing a defect in the form of one oscillator differing in
either mass or spring constant. Varying the intrinsic proper-
ties of the defects produces changes in the frequency of the
defect level within the band gap. Furthermore, as we willshow, the frequency of the defect level within the oscillator
system is related but not identical to the resonant frequency
of the defect on its own, thus mirroring the formation of
defect levels in doped semiconductors.
