Interested In
Bubble inductors: Pneumatic tuning of a stretchable inductor
AIP Advances  (December 2017)
Distance sensor using a cloth inductor
Journal of Applied Physics  (November 1988)
On the frequency characteristic of inductor in the filter of Hall thrusters
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A  (August 2010) 04 October 2023 23:08:47
Electrically connected and magnetically coupled inductors: Aiding
or opposing fluxes?
Josefina Mar /C19ıaSilveyraa)and Juan Manuel Conde Garrido
Laboratorio de S /C19olidos Amorfos, Facultad de Ingenier /C19ıa, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires
C1063ACV, Argentina and CONICET - Universidad de Buenos Aires, Instituto de tecnolog /C19ıas y Ciencias de la
ingenier /C19ıa “Hilario Fern /C19andez Long” (INTECIN), Buenos Aires C1063ACV, Argentina
(Received 21 August 2021; accepted 15 March 2022)
Representing components combined in series or parallel as a single equivalent component is a powerful
tool for simplifying systems, both in mechanics and in electrical circuits. When combining inductors,the effect of mutual inductance decreases or increases the total inductance of the system, depending on
the coupling factor between the inductors and on how they are connected. The analysis of mutually
coupled inductors can be complex and is often avoided, obscuring the underlying physics. Here, we
discuss the dependence of the equivalent inductance on the coupling factor for two parallel-connected
inductors with linear magnetic core and negligible resistance. By analyzing the current distribution ineach coil, we show that the so-called aiding and opposing arrangements are more complicated than is
frequently assumed. We recommend avoiding these terms and calling them instead aligned and anti-
aligned arrangements.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0067939
I. INTRODUCTION
Modeling series and parallel combinations of compo-
nents are a powerful tool to simplify their analysis. Simple
rules allow us to model combinations of springs, capaci-
tors, and resistors as a single effective component.However, the rules are not so simple for combining induc-tors. If a pair of inductors in series or parallel also has a
non-zero mutual inductance, then the equivalent induc-
tance may be increased or decreased, because the magneticﬂuxes they produce can be add itive or subtractive. The
mutual inductance of two coupled linear inductors with
self-inductances L
1andL2can be written in the form (see
theAppendix )
M¼kﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃL1L2p; (1)
where the coupling factor kis zero for independent inductors
and tends to unity for the ideal case of perfect coupling. Theequivalent inductance depends on how the inductors are con-nected: series or parallel, and aligned or anti-aligned.
For two aligned inductors connected in series (i.e., with
additive or aiding ﬂuxes, Fig. 1(a)), the equivalent induc-
tance is (see the Appendix )
L
eq series
aligned¼L1þL2þ2M;(2)
whereas, if the inductors are anti-aligned (i.e., with subtrac-
tive or opposing ﬂuxes, Fig. 1(b)), it is (see the Appendix )
L eq series
anti/C0aligned¼L1þL2/C02M:(3)
For two aligned inductors of negligible resistance con-
nected in parallel (Fig. 2(a)), the equivalent inductance is
(see the Appendix )
Leq parallel
aligned¼L1L2/C0M2
L1þL2/C02M; (4)while, if they are anti-aligned (Fig. 2(b)), it is (see the
Appendix )
Leq parallel
anti/C0aligned¼L1L2/C0M2
L1þL2þ2M: (5)
Series- and parallel-connected inductors have various uses
in electrical applications. For example, on-chip multilayer
spiral inductors connected in series are used in microelec-
tronics.1Large inductances per unit area are, thus, achieved
for integrated circuits. Another example is to connect induc-
tors in parallel to increase the quality factor of the compo-
nent, deﬁned as the ratio of its equivalent inductance to its
equivalent resistance. This inductor structure has recently
been proposed to improve the efﬁciency of wireless powertransfer systems.2,3
In the literature, however, the complexity of the inductor
combination analysis is often avoided. Some authors
directly omit the calculation of equivalent inductances,despite having considered the calculation of equivalent
capacitances and resistances in their works.4–6Others
restrict the study to the combination of uncoupled
inductors.7,8The equivalent inductances of series- or
parallel-connected inductors are, thus, reduced to expres-sions analogous to those of equivalent resistances. Other
authors do deal with the combination of mutually coupled
inductors, but only for the aligned and anti-aligned series
connections, which correspond to aiding and opposing
ﬂuxes, respectively.9,10Finally, numerous authors who also
analyze the parallel connection assume that, in analogy to
the series connection, the arrangements with aligned and
anti-aligned inductors correspond to aiding and opposing
ﬂuxes, respectively.11–16
In this paper, we will analyze the dependence of the equiv-
alent inductance on the coupling factor for two parallel-connected inductors of negligible resistance. By illustrating
the distribution of currents through each branch, we will
show that the conﬁgurations with aligned and anti-aligned
inductors do not always produce additive or subtractive mag-
netic ﬂuxes, respectively, as is frequently assumed.
365 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 365 04 October 2023 23:08:47
