Interested In
Waves on a lead-filled hose
The Physics T eacher  (March 2001)
Fast flux control of 3D transmon qubits using a magnetic hose
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (January 2021)
Betting on Better Buoyancy? Be Careful What Y ou Wish For
Phys. T each.  (September 2020) 04 October 2023 23:00:25
Measuring the viscosity of air with soapy water, a smartphone, a funnel,
and a hose: An experiment for undergraduate physics students
Alexandre Delvert
Univ Rennes, CNRS, IPR (Institut de Physique de Rennes)-UMR 6251, F-35000 Rennes, France
Pascal Panizzaa)
Univ Rennes, CNRS, IPR (Institut de Physique de Rennes)-UMR 6251, F-35000 Rennes, France and
Laboratoire Sciences et Ing /C19enierie de la Matie `re Molle, ESPCI Paris, PSL University, Sorbonne Universit /C19e,
CNRS UMR 7615, F-75005 Paris, France
Laurent Courbinb)
Univ Rennes, CNRS, IPR (Institut de Physique de Rennes)-UMR 6251, F-35000 Rennes, France
(Received 28 July 2020; accepted 10 October 2021)
We investigate the spontaneous motion of a soap ﬁlm in a conical geometry connected to a long tube
and show how it can be used to measure the dynamic viscosity of air. In contrast to other techniques
that are complicated to implement and require expensive and sophisticated equipment, this
measurement method relies only on soapy water and three everyday life objects: a smartphone, afunnel, and a hose. More precisely, to determine the viscosity of air, we use a smartphone to record
the spontaneous motion of a soap ﬁlm placed in a funnel when the motion of the ﬁlm is quasistatic
and the ﬂow of air escaping the geometry is viscously dominated. This simple experiment should beof value to undergraduate physics students in learning about effects of both ﬂuid viscosity and surface
tension (another ﬂuid property which they could also measure with a smartphone; Goy et al. ,P h y s .
Teach. 55, 498–499 (2017)), and the usefulness of reasonable approximations in physics.
#2022
Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006881
I. INTRODUCTION
Two of the main parameters associated with ﬂuid dynam-
ics are a ﬂuid’s viscosity, which characterizes its resistance
to ﬂow and surface tension, which is the energy needed to
increase the surface area of a ﬂuid interface by one unit.2We
regularly see effects of surface tension in our everyday life,e.g., whenever we blow soap bubbles.2,3Because of surface
tension, the liquid ﬁlm forming the bubble minimizes its sur-
face area to seek a spherical shape. Like surface tension, a
ﬂuid’s viscosity originates from molecular effects and its
consequences can be seen at a macroscopic level: When
shaking a jar of honey, physics students at any level guess
correctly that it is a highly viscous liquid compared to water.Sophisticated and expensive equipment for tensiometry and
rheology can be used to fully characterize these two ﬂuid
parameters. It is interesting to note, however, that the litera-
ture documents simple and inexpensive ways that students
can measure the air–liquid surface tension or the viscosity of
a liquid. Therefore, these methods could be useful in
introductory-level physics laboratories.1,4For instance, liquid–
air surface tension can be determined using the camera of a
smartphone and a ruler to characterize the shape of a pendantdrop.1Also, liquid viscosity can be measured using a weight-
controlled capillary viscometer,4measurements being based in
this case on the simple determination of the rate at which liquid
drains from a tank through a capillary tube.
In sharp contrast with measuring the viscosity of liquids,
measuring that of gases is not an easy task. For example, the
dynamic viscosity of air is ga¼18:1lPa s at 20/C14C, roughly
50 times smaller than that of water, and too small to be mea-
sured with standard rheometry because of the mechanical
friction inherent in this type of equipment. Instead, one canuse a custom-built viscometer that can be complicated to
implement, such as a friction-free electromagnetic spinningsystem based on the diamagnetic levitation of graphite.5As
an alternative to these complicated experiments, in thispaper, we present a device that allows students to measurethe viscosity of air at low cost with simple equipment: soapy
water, a funnel, some tubing, and a smartphone camera.
The experiment consists of recording and analyzing the
spontaneous motion of a soap bubble ﬁlm in a funnel thathas a long and narrow neck. Such a ﬁlm moves on the slop-ing sides of a funnel from its wide opening toward its narrow
end, and, as it moves, it pushes air out through the neck of
the funnel. The outward motion of air is resisted by itsdynamic viscosity. By timing this motion, we learn how fastthe air is pushed out, and knowing the geometric parametersof the funnel and air–liquid surface tension, the viscosity of
air can be found. This experiment resembles a recent study
in which we discuss different scenarios of shrinking surfacesoap bubbles sitting on a thin solid with an oriﬁce locatedunder the apex of the bubble.
6In one of these scenarios, also
driven by Laplace pressure,7a bubble remains hemispherical
as it shrinks so that the contact angle made by the bubblewith the solid remains close to p=2 as the base of the bubble
moves toward the oriﬁce. The differences between theseexperiments are that the soap bubble in this experiment
moves on an incline instead of a ﬂat surface, and the air ﬂow
satisﬁes Poiseuille’s law rather than Bernoulli’s principle. Itis worthwhile noting that the described experiment can alsobe seen as a simple self-propelling system with which stu-
dents would observe soap ﬁlms moving against gravity.
Other studies found in the literature discuss methods that areoften costly and difﬁcult to implement and rely on suitablesurface chemistry or controlled surface topography to pro-duce the self-propulsion of ﬂuids on solids.
8–10For example,
the use of controlled gradients of surface chemistry of a solid
can make a drop of water run against gravity.11Other studies
64 Am. J. Phys. 90(1), January 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 64 04 October 2023 23:00:25
have shown that gradients of cross-sectional areas can also
make capillary forces trigger the spontaneous motion of
drops, bubbles, and meniscii in conical wires and tubes and
wedges.12–15Here, we investigate the hitherto unreported
case of soap ﬁlms.
Section 