Interested In
Design and fabrication of an autonomous smart golf caddie
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2023)
On the ef ficiency of the golf swing
Am. J. Phys.  (December 2006)
Dynamic characterization of golf equipment
J Acoust Soc Am  (October 2004) 04 October 2023 23:15:46
The golfer’s curse revisited with motion constants
Olivier Pujola)
Universit /C19e de Lille, D /C19epartement de physique, B ^at. P5, 59655 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France
Jos/C19e-Philippe P/C19erezb)
Universit /C19e Toulouse 3, IRAP-CNRS, 14 Avenue /C19Edouard Belin, 31400 Toulouse, France
(Received 22 June 2021; accepted 12 May 2022)
We revisit the golfer’s curse, which is the possibility that a golf ball can emerge from the
cylindrical hole into which it has entered. Our analysis focuses on three constants of the motion.
One of these is the energy, because we assume that the ball rolls without slipping on the inner wallof the hole, losing only a small amount of energy to rolling resistance; the other two are related to
the angular momentum about the contact point of the ball with the inner wall of the hole. We
develop an analysis of the motion of the ball and report measurements of the moment of inertia of areal golf ball. Solving the equation of motion along the vertical direction, we address the question
of whether or not the ball could complete a vertical oscillation without reaching the bottom of the
hole. We also present measurements of the dynamical friction for a golf ball and discussdissipation in slip conditions. We conclude by proposing a challenge to golf players: to ﬁnd a way
to send a ball into a hole in order to make it emerge.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0060788
I. INTRODUCTION
The golfer’s curse is the counter-intuitive emergence of a golf
ball from the hole into which it has been directed. If this occurs, it
must be due to the existence of an upward force that acts against
weight. We analyze the problem in the case that the ball stays in
contact with the inner wall of the hole, a condition admittedly not
often met in reality.1Of course, the phenomenon discussed here
can only occur if the ball does not approach the hole close to its
center-line. Historically, the roots of this problem can be found
in the Mathematical Problems for the Cambridge Mathematical
Tripos Examination by Wolstenholme.2The problems num-
bered 2689 and 2690 in this reference concern the motion of asphere on the surface of a cylinder of inclination awith respect
to the vertical direction (for problem 2689, the cylinder is hori-
zontal). Figure 1is the text of problem 2690 with the equations
of motion to be proven by students. The general equations of
motion of a sphere over rough surfaces were given by Edward
Routh in his treatise on the dynamics of rigid bodies; see section
215 and further.3In particular, sections 225, 226, and 227 deal
with rolling motion on a rough cylinder. Routh showed that the
center of the sphere can exhibit an oscillating motion along the
cylinder axis: “… the sphere cannot be made to travel continu-
ally in one direction along the length of the cylinder exceptwhen the point of contact describes a generator.”
It seems that the question of this type of motion was not fur-
ther investigated until recently.4–6Gualtieri et al. performed a
theoretical and experimental analysis of the motion.7Later, we
reanalyzed the motion in order to show that Gualtieri’s interpre-
tation via the Coriolis torque was due to the arbitrary choice of
a non-Galilean reference frame.8The more natural choice of a
Galilean terrestrial reference frame Rallowed us to ﬁnd the
same result by considering only two real forces, the weight of
the ball and the reaction force exerted by the inner wall of the
hole. While this problem originates more from theoretical and
academic investigations rather than the need to understandoccasional real-life occurrences, they are possible under the
assumptions of no-slip constraint, continuous contact with the
inner surface of the hole, and negligible dissipation. Despite
the rarity of this phenomenon, the problem of the golfer’s curse(or surprise) is a nice application of classical mechanics and
associated experiments. Furthermore, this physical model can
be seen as a motivation for future experiments, where a ball-
and-hole arrangement mimics the theory presented here inorder to determine whether balls can systematically be made toemerge from the hole. In the present work, the reference frame
Rof the analysis is that of the Earth (or lab), but the emphasis
is on constants of the motion that arise from energy and theangular momentum of the ball about its mobile contact point
with the inner surface of the hole.
8In Fig. 2, we sketch the ball
(mass m¼45 g, radius rb¼21 mm), which rolls without slip-
ping on the vertical cylindrical inner wall of the hole (radius rc
¼54 mm and depth hc¼102 mm). We adopt the cylindrical
unit vectors ðeq;eu;andezÞ,t h ea x i s Ozbeing vertically
upward and opposite to the weight ﬁeld vector g¼/C0gez.
The outline of the paper is as follows: In Sec. 