Interested In
Decomposition of Lorentz transformations
J. Math. Phys.  (October 1987)
The abstract Lorentz transformation group
American Journal of Physics  (September 1992)
The Lorentz operator revisited
J. Math. Phys.  (February 1991) 04 October 2023 23:10:31
On the linearity of the generalized Lorentz transformation
Frank Verheesta)
Sterrenkundig Observatorium, Universiteit Gent, Krijgslaan 281, B-9000 Gent, Belgium and
School of Chemistry and Physics, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg 3209, South Africa
(Received 23 December 2020; accepted 30 March 2022)
Lorentz transformations between inertial observers, along with Einstein’s theory of special
relativity, remedied discrepancies between Newtonian physics and Maxwell’s electromagnetism
caused by the use of the same time in all inertial frames. In view of the fundamental importance ofthe relativity between inertial observers, there have been several papers deriving generalized
Lorentz transformations without using light. Proving that general transformations are linear in
space and time can be done in several ways, most commonly relying on a four-dimensionalMinkowski spacetime, but other approaches are possible. A method is presented here that
establishes the linearity of the transformation by considering velocity transformations in the light
of Einstein’s ﬁrst relativity postulate of 1905. Once linearity is obtained, the remainder is fairlystraightforward and parallels results and methods found in the literature.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0010234
I. INTRODUCTION
In pre-relativistic physics, inertial reference frames move
in a homogeneous, isotropic Euclidean space, allowing free
choice of origin and orientation. Time is the same for all
inertial observers. The associated coordinate transformationis the well-known Galilean transformation, given below.
This worked ﬁne for mechanics, but after electromagne-
tism became well established, it turned out that its basicequations were not invariant under Galilean transformationsbetween inertial observers, where Newton’s ﬁrst law holds.
Once this problem was realized, it became necessary to
establish a transformation in which electromagnetism wasinvariant at the cost of abandoning the concept of absolutetime. This led, after several reﬁnements, to what is nowcalled the Lorentz transformation within the context of
which it is natural to consider a four-dimensional spacetime.
A 1905 paper
1by Einstein established the special theory
of relativity, postulating that (i) the laws of physics areinvariant in all inertial frames of reference and (ii) the speedof light in vacuum is the same for all inertial observers. Theconcepts of the aether and absolute time were swept away.
Galilean transformations were shown to be correct in the
limit of relative speeds that are small compared to the uni-versal limit. From the vast literature, we only refer to someof the standard books incorporating this matter,
2–4and,
below, to selected publications.
After the general acceptance of the special relativity the-
ory, there arose efforts to establish a generalized Lorentz
transformation not linked to the invariant speed of light butbased on the relativity between inertial observers in homoge-neous and isotropic three-dimensional Euclidean space withtime differing for each observer; see, for example, Refs. 5–9.
These efforts are important because, as pointed out by L /C19evy-
Leblond,
7among others, the emphasis on the relation to elec-
tromagnetism, in particular, to the invariant speed of light,tends to obscure the fact that all of physics should obey abasic tenet of the special theory of relativity regarding iner-
tial observers. The question is: How and where to start a der-
ivation of the generalized Lorentz transformation if theinvariant speed of light is not explicitly required? How dowe incorporate the transformation of time from one inertialobserver to the next? Of course, we all know the Lorentz
transformation, but how to get there?
A ﬁrst line of approach is to start from the properties of
homogeneity and isotropy in Euclidean space and in time,
from which it is often concluded that the transformations
between the reference frames of two inertial observers inuniform rectilinear translation are linear in the coordinates
and in the observer-dependent time. This is only true with
certain nuances:
4transformations should be afﬁne functions
and form upon composition an afﬁne group.10
With linearity, application of the ﬁrst relativity principle sufﬁ-
ces to derive the generalized Lorentz form.11–14The original
concept of a four-dimensional (Minkowski) spacetime15is based
on the special relativity postulates, inclusive of the constantspeed of light. Hence, it is not ap r i o r i obvious that it holds true
for a generalized Lorentz transformation not involving light.
Other authors prove the linearity of the generalized Lorentz
transformation based on alternative arguments, involving dis-tance and time intervals rather than coordinates,
5–7,16–18com-
position of velocities,19conservation of uniform rectilinear
motions,20,21or an interesting Gedankenexperiment to estab-
lish an upper limit velocity.8In a recent paper,9Mathews dis-
cussed and compared several of these methods and included an
extended, annotated bibliography. Some of these proofs thatthe generalized Lorentz transformation is linear require quite
lengthy and involved analyses.
The exposition that follows in Sec. 