Interested In
Intrinsic W avelength Standard Absorption Bands in Holmium Oxide Solution for UV/visible Molecular
Absorption Spectrophotometry
Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data  (March 2005) 04 October 2023 22:56:00
A teaching-learning sequence about climate change: From theory
to practicea)
Stefano Toffalettib)and Marco Di Mauroc)
Physical Science Communication Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Trento, Via Sommarive 14,
38123 Povo (Trento), Italy
Massimiliano Malgierid)
Department of Physics, University of Pavia, via Bassi 6, 27100 Pavia, Italy
Tommaso Rosi,e)Eugenio Tufino,f)Pasquale Onorato,g)and Stefano Ossh)
Physical Science Communication Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Trento, Via Sommarive 14,
38123 Povo (Trento), Italy
(Received 30 November 2022; accepted 14 July 2023)
We describe a collection of relatively simple experiments and laboratory demonstrations devoted
to the physics of Earth’s energy balance. Many of the experiments also address fundamental
aspects of physics at the undergraduate level. Results of classroom testing of this sequence ofactivities are presented and discussed.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of
Physics Teachers. https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0137089
I. INTRODUCTION
Climate change, a phenomenon with no political or geo-
graphical boundaries, is one of the most important issues fac-ing our world. It is part of the role of science to relate issues
concerning global warming to the physics and chemistry of
the atmosphere using formal theoretical and experimental
tools and protocols. At the university level, through carefully
structured laboratory investigations, students can study thephysics of the atmosphere, learn methods of experimental
and theoretical investigation, and understand the ethical
commitment of the scientiﬁc community to address issues ofimportance to humanity and the planet.
1,2
We present here an experiment-based teaching-learning
sequence (TLS), suitable for undergraduate and masters
students, mainly devoted to the physical basis of the green-
house effect (GHE), leading to the development of a sim-
ple but effective model for the Earth’s climate3that is
within reach of students and allows qualitative predictions
of the radiative steady-state average temperature of the
Earth-atmosphere system receiving radiation from the Sun
and understanding of the effects of the increase in green-
house gases in the atmosphere. Feedback effects can beincluded as well. The need for a TLS dedicated to this spe-
ciﬁc topic stems from the fact that the GHE is difﬁcult to
place in traditional physics and science curricula becauseit requires concepts from several traditionally distinct
areas in physics. The TLS includes interesting phenomena
in optics, thermodynamics, and radiative transfer that help
students integrate knowledge and see physics as a unitary
discipline.
The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. 