Interested In
Development of a method for calculating fire and oil spills parameters
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2020)
Color-based oil spill image segmentation
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2018)
Energy approach to the description of the dynamics of hydrocarbon spills
Physics of Fluids  (July 2023) 04 October 2023 22:59:09
The edge profile of liquid spills
F.Behroozia)
Department of Physics, University of Northern Iowa, Cedar Falls, Iowa 50614
(Received 1 June 2021; accepted 2 September 2021)
The Young–Laplace (Y–L) equation relates the curvature of the interface between two ﬂuids to the
pressure difference across that interface. The link between the surface curvature and pressurediscontinuity underpins numerous phenomena in hydrostatics, including the proﬁles of sessile
(immobile) drops, pendant drops, capillary bridges, and liquid pearls. In most cases, the application
of the Y–L equation readily yields the governing differential equations of the ﬂuid surface but
often these equations have no analytic solutions; this is the case, for example, with the proﬁle of a
dew drop or a liquid pendant. There are, however, some cases for which the differential equationshave closed form solutions; one is the edge proﬁle of a liquid spill or puddle on a horizontal
surface. Here, we review the Y–L equation and apply it to obtain the governing differential
equations of the edge proﬁle for a liquid spill. The solution of the differential equations results in auniversal function that describes the edge proﬁle of any ﬂuid. One important ﬁnding is that the
proﬁle curve begins its descent very gradually from the ﬂat top of the ﬂuid far away from the edge
and terminates at the point, where the angle between the proﬁle curve and the horizontal matchesthe equilibrium contact angle of the liquid on the substrate.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0058674
I. INTRODUCTION
Physics students readily associate certain analytic func-
tions with well-known phenomena: parabolas with projec-
tiles, ellipses with planetary orbits, hyperbolas with atomic
collisions, and the hyperbolic cosine with the catenary.1
However, most students are surprised to learn that no ana-lytic function describes the graceful proﬁle of a dew drop.2,3
In fact, there are many other curves and surfaces in nature
that cannot be described by analytic functions. Among these
are the proﬁles of liquid drops and pendants, liquid pearls,
and capillary bridges, all fascinating and ubiquitous.4In
most of these cases, the governing differential equations of
the surface can be derived easily by applying the
Young–Laplace equation. Due to lacking analytic solutions,
the differential equations must be numerically integrated to
obtain the proﬁle of the surface.5
There are, however, some cases for which the differential
equations have closed-form solutions. Among these are the
proﬁle of a capillary bridge between two parallel plates, the
shape of the meniscus of an air-liquid interface around a ver-
tical ﬁber, and the surface proﬁle of a liquid next to a vertical
plane.6,7A more general version of the latter case gives the
shape of the liquid surface in contact with an inclined plane.8
When a glass of water spills on a horizontal surface, it
spreads into a puddle with a ﬂat top and a curved edge pro-
ﬁle. The analytic solution of the edge proﬁle offers an excel-
lent example of the application of the Young–Laplace
equation in a mathematical physics course. However, to the
best of our knowledge, the solution of the edge proﬁle has
not appeared in the literature.
The Young–Laplace (Y-L) equation relates the curvature
of the interface between two ﬂuids to the pressure difference
across the interface and, thus, provides the most direct route
for obtaining the governing differential equations of a liquidsurface.9Thus, it is somewhat surprising that no current
introductory physics texts cover the Y–L equation or even
mention it in passing. Indeed, with some notable exceptions,
many advanced texts in hydrodynamics do not cover theY–L equation.10,11For the record, we note that Ref. 8devotes
a chapter to the Y–L equation and its applications; the deri-vation of the equation, however, is by the method of virtualwork. The Y–L equation is also sketched brieﬂy under the
heading of “Laplace pressure” in Ref. 4; shorter treatments
appear in several other texts.
10On the other hand, quite a
few well-known texts in hydrodynamics including the classicone by Horace Lamb do not cover the Y–L equation.11
Here, we will ﬁrst consider the mathematical basis of sur-
face curvature and review an important theorem in differen-tial geometry. The theorem states that at any surface point,the directions associated with the local minimum and maxi-mum radii of curvature are orthogonal. These radii character-ize the local surface curvature and enter directly into thederivation of the Y–L equation as we consider the balance offorces acting on an element of the liquid surface. We thenapply the Y–L equation to obtain the parametric equations of
the proﬁle as x(h)andy(h),where his the angle between the
proﬁle curve and the horizontal. The parametric solutionsprovide several ways of characterizing the proﬁle, each witha unique insight. For example, the pair-wise values of x(h)
andy(h)provide an alternative method for obtaining the pro-
ﬁle curve y(x).
Finally, we present the differential equation of the proﬁle in
Cartesian coordinates and integrate it to ﬁnd the analytic pro-ﬁle curve x(y). Comparison of the direct analytic equation of
the proﬁle with the one constructed from the parametric equa-tions provides corroboration and further insight into the differ-ent approaches to the problem. In the Sec. IV, we expand on
three additional insights provided by the analytic solution:
(1) The analytic equation of the edge proﬁle is a universal
function that describes the edge proﬁle of any ﬂuid spillwith just two ﬂuid parameters: density and surfacetension.
(2) The proﬁle curve begins its descent very gradually from
the top of the ﬂuid far away from the edge, so the reachof the proﬁle in the horizontal direction is many timesthe depth of the ﬂuid.
10 Am. J. Phys. 90(1), January 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 10 04 October 2023 22:59:09
(3) The proﬁle curve terminates at the point, where the angle
between the proﬁle and the horizontal matches the equi-
librium contact angle of the liquid on the substrate. Inother words, the substrate determines the end point of
the proﬁle curve and the depth of the spill.
