Interested In
Is Newton’ s second law really Newton’ s?
Am. J. Phys.  (October 201 1)
Newton’ s superb theorem: An elementary geometric proof
Am. J. Phys.  (May 201 1)
A Newton–Marchenko equation and generalized optical theorem for elastodynamics
J. Math. Phys.  (August 1992) 04 October 2023 23:09:06
NOTES AND DISCUSSION
A note on Newton’s shell-point equivalency theorem
B. Cameron Reeda)
Department of Physics (Emeritus), Alma College, Alma, Michigan 48801
(Received 23 September 2021; accepted 16 February 2022)
An isotropic sphere or shell of matter can be regarded as acting as a point mass at its center so far as
its gravitational force on an external test mass is concerned. This is well-known, but what is often
not appreciated is that this behavior also holds for a central potential of the harmonic form V(r)/C24r2.
This paper proves this assertion and shows that only the gravitational and harmonic potentials
possess this property. #2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0072584
I. INTRODUCTION
Newton’s theorem that an isotropic shell or sphere can be
regarded as acting as a point mass located at its center when
computing the force it exerts on an external test mass is acornerstone of his gravitational theory and its application tocelestial mechanics. This beautiful result can be regarded
as a manifestation of the inverse-square nature of the gravita-
tional force or, equivalently, of its corresponding inverse-ﬁrst-power potential. Richard Feynman describes thistheorem in almost supernatural terms: “When we add theeffects all together, it seems a miracle that the net force is
exactly the same as we would get if we put all the mass in
the middle!”
1
Proofs of this theorem and its corollary that a test mass
trapped within a uniform spherical shell experiences no netforce can be found in Feynman and many mechanics and
dynamics texts in common use; these usually proceed by
integrating the potential and then extending the argument toa solid sphere.
2–7An exception is Goldstein’s venerable
Classical Mechanics , where he probably considered the
proof too trivial for this more advanced text.8Grifﬁths ana-
lyzes the equivalent electrostatic case for a uniform shell of
electrical charge via both Gauss’s law and direct integrationof the potential, leaving to an exercise a direct integration ofthe electric ﬁeld.
9Another approach to the interior of a uni-
form shell beng force-free is to imagine an off-center test
mass equipped with an observer who looks at patches of theshell in opposite directions which subtend the same solidangle. Since the areas of the patches will be proportionalto the squares of the observer’s distances to them but the
forces they exert depend on the inverse squares of these dis-
tances, the forces exerted by the two patches are equal andcancel; the argument is then extended to cover the entiresphere. If the force were not inverse-square, this argument
would obviously break down and the test mass would experi-
ence a net force; this point will be revisited later. This force-free behavior inside the shell is, however, entirely irrelevantto Newton’s issue of wanting to prove that the force exertedby the shell on an external test mass acts as if the entire mass
of the shell were concentrated at its center; a priori , there is
no reason that gravity hasto be inverse-square.
More advanced students may be aware that if gravity were
instead a linear attractive force, planetary orbits would stillbe closed ellipses, albeit with the attracting mass being
located at the geometric center of the ellipse as opposed to
being at one of the foci; this motion also arises with a mass
attached to springs that extend off to the xandydirections.
While these are obviously quite different scenarios, it isstriking that both inverse-square and linear forces give rise
to closed elliptical orbits. It can be shown that the gravita-
tional and harmonic potentials are, in fact, the only integer-
power ones that can support closed orbits. This behavior is
now regarded as a manifestation of Bertrand’s theorem,
which received its own section in the second edition of
Goldstein’s book. A paper recently published in this journal
offers a more advanced look at the dynamical symmetries
underlying this powerful theorem.
10However, none of these
sources point out that the harmonic potential also satisﬁes
shell-point equivalency just like its gravitational cousin, and
that it is the only other power-law potential which does so. A
proof of this assertion is a straightforward extension of the
usual gravitational case and is developed here. This is not a
new result, but it seems not to be well known in the physics
teaching community. That this is the case ﬁrst came to my
attention when it appeared in a paper on cosmology,although this is likely not the ﬁrst source to point this out.11
The purpose of this paper is to bring this behavior to wider
attention. To give this development a motivation for class-
room use, pose the following situation to your students:
“Imagine that you are Newton, but you can use the full
machinery of calculus and potential theory now taught to
physics students. You hypothesize that gravity is a central
power-law force such that the force exerted by an element of
mass dMof a uniform shell on an external test mass mis
F¼þKnmðdMÞrn/C01^r, where ris the element-to-test mass
distance and ^ris a unit vector from the element to the test
mass. The potential energy is then UðrÞ¼/C0 KmðdMÞrn, and
the potential function is VðrÞ¼UðrÞ=m¼/C0KðdMÞrn. Now
consider these two questions. First, for what value(s) of the
power ndoes point-shell equivalency hold? Second, of these
possible values, which gives a period-distance behavior con-
sistent with Kepler’s Third Law, T2/r3? For this latter
question, assume a circular orbit and invoke a simple cen-tripetal force argument.” Note that if K<0a n d n<0(n>0)
the force will be repulsive (attractive) and the reverse
for K>0, but these considerations do not affect the
conclusions.
394 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 394 04 October 2023 23:09:06
