Interested In
Quantum Hall ef fect systems of electrons with anisotropic patterns
AIP Advances  (January 2023)
Anisotropic electronic states in the fractional quantum Hall regime
AIP Advances  (December 2016)
Anisotropy of quantum Hall phases at filling factor ν = 9 / 2
J. Appl. Phys.  (April 2010) 04 October 2023 23:16:12
Electrostatic shape energy differences of one-dimensional line charges
Matt Majica)
School of Chemical and Physical Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600,
Wellington 6140, New Zealand
(Received 18 November 2021; accepted 1 June 2022)
We investigate the electrostatic energy of one-dimensional line charges, focusing on the energy
difference between lines of different shapes. The self-energy of a strictly one-dimensional charge is
inﬁnite, but one can quantify the energy by considering geometries that approach a one-dimensionalcurve, for example, thin wires, thin strips, or chains of close point charges. In each model, the energy
diverges logarithmically as the geometry approaches a perfect one-dimensional curve, but the energy
also contains a ﬁnite term depending on the shape of the line—the “shape energy.” The difference inshape energy between a straight line and a circle is checked to be the same using a range of models.
To calculate the shape energy of more complex shapes numerically, we propose a line integral where
the singularity in the integrand is canceled. This integral is used to calculate the shape energy of ahelix.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0079100
I. INTRODUCTION
The electrostatic energy associated with a charge distribu-
tion represents the work required to bring the inﬁnitesimal
charges to their positions from inﬁnitely far away. This canbe expressed as an integral over the product of the chargedensity and the potential. If the charge distribution is one-
dimensional, the integral diverges due to the inﬁnite poten-
tial at the charge’s location. This means it takes an inﬁniteamount of energy to compress charges into an inﬁnitely thinline segment. However, given a pre-existing line segment,one may ask what energy is associated with its shape .A
more compact shape should have higher energy, as work is
required to change a charged line’s shape. For example, thisenergy difference affects the process of DNA and microﬁberwrapping.
1–3The electrostatic energy of thin wires can also
be used to determine the equilibrium charge conﬁguration.
While the equilibrium charge density of a perfect one-
dimensional line is understood to be uniform, different waysof approaching the limit of a perfect one-dimensional curveyield more interesting distributions.
4–6Our ﬁrst goal is to
show that a wide range of approaches can be used to describe
the energy of thin line segments using the energy differencebetween a straight line and a circle as a case study. Weinvestigate four physical models that can be used to approxi-mate line segments: a thin conducting wire, a uniformly
charged wire, a thin strip or ribbon, and discrete charges.
Each model involves a regularization parameter, for exam-ple, the small radius of the wire or the discrete charge spac-ing; as this parameter approaches zero, the model becomes aperfect line and its energy diverges logarithmically. For each
model, the energies of a straight line and a circle are found
to differ by the same constant. We also investigate the thinspheroid model of a straight line as used in Ref. 7but ﬁnd
that this model is not viable due to the changing radius along
the length of the line.
For complex curves, we need a method that does not
involve a regularization parameter, since that involves takinga limit that is not suited for numerical treatment. To the bestof our knowledge, such a method is not available in the liter-ature, so here we construct a regularized integral for this pur-
pose. This integral allows us to calculate the energy of any
curve with a given arc length parameterization.