Interested In
An intuitive approach to inertial forces and the centrifugal force paradox in general relativity
Am. J. Phys.  (October 2006)
Vocal range for speech determines perception of a musical pattern
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005)
Premotion silence in rapid voluntary movements for speech: Implications for suprabulbar control
mechanisms
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005) 04 October 2023 23:20:50
Submarine paradox softened
Hrvoje Nikolic ´a)
Theoretical Physics Division, Rudjer Bo /C20skovic ´ Institute, P.O.B. 180, HR-10002 Zagreb, Croatia
(Received 4 January 2022; accepted 19 July 2022)
In Supplee’s submarine paradox, a naive argument based on Lorentz contraction leads to a
contradiction that a fast submarine should sink in the water’s reference frame but ﬂoat in thesubmarine’s reference frame. Due to the submarine’s rigidity constraints, it is not easy to resolve
the paradox in a manifestly covariant form. To simplify the problem, we consider a version of the
paradox in which one ﬂuid moves through another ﬂuid. An analysis of ideal relativistic ﬂuids in a
weak gravitational ﬁeld shows that the moving ﬂuid has a larger pressure and, hence, sinks, in
agreement with known results for the rigid submarine.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0084185
I. INTRODUCTION
Consider a submarine at rest with respect to water, having
the same density as water so that it neither sinks nor ﬂoats.What happens if the submarine attains a relativistic velocity v
in the horizontal direction? In the water’s rest frame, the sub-marine should become Lorentz contracted, so it shouldbecome denser than water and therefore sink. Yet analo-gously, in the reference frame where the submarine is at rest,it is the water that should become Lorentz contracted anddenser, so the submarine should ﬂoat. However, it is a contra-diction; whether the submarine will sink or ﬂoat cannot
depend on the observer. This puzzle, known as the submarine
paradox, was ﬁrst studied by Supplee
1and then further ana-
lyzed from various points of view in Refs. 2–4.T h e ya l l
agreed that the submarine will, in fact, sink. Physically, this isbecause buoyancy depends on Earth’s gravity, so the relevantvelocity to consider is the velocity of the submarine relative
to Earth (which is independent of the observer’s velocity).
One difﬁculty which is encountered when analyzing the
submarine paradox is the fact that the usual Lorentz contrac-tion formula L
0¼L=cis not a transformation law for a ten-
sor. In this formula, Lis the proper length, namely, the
length of object as seen by observer comoving with the
object, L0is the length seen by observer moving with veloc-
ityvrelative to the comoving observer, and
c¼1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0v2p (1)
is the usual special-relativistic factor, in units where c¼1. On
the other hand, since the problem involves gravity, its propertreatment requires the use of general relativity naturally for-mulated in terms of tensors. An argument based on theLorentz contraction formula lacks manifest general covari-ance and looks rather awkward from the general-relativisticpoint of view. To our knowledge, the only manifestly covari-ant treatment of the submarine paradox is the one by Matsas.
2
However, the treatment by Matsas is quite involved, mainlybecause one needs to implement a constraint that the submar-ine is a rigid object. (In fact, even within a special-relativisticcontext, the rigidity constraint may be complicated when onestudies an object with a non-constant velocity.
5)
The motivation for this work is to ﬁnd a resolution of the
submarine paradox which, like Ref. 2, is relativistically
covariant, but at the same time involves simpler formalismthan.2Our main idea is to drop the rigidity constraint. Indeed,
if the shape of an object is changed such that its density andvolume remain the same in its own rest frame, the effect ofbuoyancy should be the same. Hence, the rigidity constraint(the constraint that the object’s shape and volume shouldremain constant in its own reference frame) seems inessential.Thus, instead of studying a rigid submarine, we study a ﬂuid,ﬁrst idealized as incompressible with a ﬁxed constant densityq, and later, more realistically, as a slightly compressible ﬂuid
like water. This signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the problem because a
manifestly covariant treatment is much simpler for ﬂuids thanfor rigid objects. We study a drop of one ﬂuid (called “ink”)of proper density q, moving horizontally through another ﬂuid
(called the “lake”) of the same proper density q. Here, the
names ink and lake are taken for the sake of intuitive visuali-zation. (To avoid diffusion of one ﬂuid into another, in a real-istic experiment one might want to deal with ﬂuids at atemperature close to absolute zero, so water-based ﬂuidswould not be the best choice. Alternatively, perhaps it is pos-sible to have two different immiscible ﬂuids with almostequal densities.) As with the submarine, the question iswhether the moving drop will sink or ﬂoat. By an elementaryyet manifestly covariant analysis, we ﬁnd that it will sink.
This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. 