Interested In
Motions of Kepler circumbinary planets in restricted three-body problem under radiating primaries
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 2015)
Gas Accretion from a Circumbinary Disk to Protoplanetary Disks
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2009)
SPOTS: Search for Planets Of T wo Stars—A Direct Imaging Survey for Exoplanets in Binary Systems
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2009) 04 October 2023 22:50:06
An exploration of circumbinary systems using gravitational
microlensing
Brett C. George
Department of Physics, College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts 01610
Eleni-Alexandra Kontoua)
Department of Physics, College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts 01610; Physics Program, Bard
College, 30 Campus Rd., Annandale-on-Hudson, New York 12504; and ITFA and GRAPPA, Universiteit van
Amsterdam, Science Park 904, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Patrycja Przewoznik
Department of Physics, College of the Holy Cross, Worcester, Massachusetts 01610
Eleanor Turrellb)
Physics Program, Bard College, 30 Campus Rd., Annandale-on-Hudson, New York 12504
(Received 18 February 2022; accepted 26 November 2022)
Gravitational microlensing is one of the methods to detect exoplanets–planets outside our solar
system. Here, we focus on the theoretical modeling of systems with three lensing objects and inparticular circumbinary systems. Circumbinary systems include two stars and at least one planet
and are estimated to represent a sizeable portion of all exoplanets. Extending a method developed
for binary lenses to the three lens case, we explore the parameter space of circumbinary systems,producing exact magniﬁcation maps and light curves.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0088604
I. INTRODUCTION
Gravitational lensing was one of the major predictions of
the general theory of relativity. It refers to the bending of
light by a massive object between the source and the
observer. Gravitational microlensing is a special case ofgravitational lensing where multiple images are created with
very small separations. Typically, a separation of less than a
few milliarcseconds remains unresolved with current capa-bilities. Thus, the images are not separate but the overallmagniﬁcation changes produce an observable effect.
Gravitational microlensing is more difﬁcult to observe
than strong lensing where the images can be separated. In1986, Paczynski
1was the ﬁrst to propose that microlensing
might be observable in the Magellanic clouds. Since the ini-
tial searches, thousands of microlensing events have beenobserved (see Ref. 2for more references). Mao and
Paczynski3were the ﬁrst to suggest, in 1991, that gravita-
tional microlensing could be used to discover exoplanets,that is, planets outside our solar system. The main idea is thefollowing: As a background star passes behind, and close tothe line of sight of a foreground star, there is a gravitationallensing event. This is a microlensing event as typically theimages are unresolved, creating only a surge in the ﬂux ofthe source star. If the foreground star hosts planets, that willcreate an additional perturbation which can be observed.
The ﬁrst exoplanets were discovered in the 1990s,
4,5and
in the last few decades, thousands of exoplanets have beenobserved using different methods. The most popular is thetransit method, where, as a planet passes in front of a star, a
dip in its ﬂux is observable. Other methods include Doppler
spectroscopy, and, more recently, direct imaging.
The ﬁrst detection of an exoplanet using microlensing was
in 2004.
6Since then, over a hundred exoplanets have been
detected using this method. Searching for exoplanets using
microlensing presents signiﬁcant difﬁculties as planetarydeviations in light curves are short lived, not repeatable, andcan easily be missed. Additionally, planetary parameters,
such as the mass and orbit, depend on the properties of thehost star and these are typically unknown. Thus, the mostsuccessful observations usually include a combination of
microlensing followed by high-resolution imaging.
Despite these difﬁculties, microlensing offers some advan-
tages compared to the more popular transit and Doppler meth-ods. The most important one is that microlensing is the most
sensitive method for small planets further from their host star. In
particular, planets beyond the so-called “snow line” where ice istypically formed are usually undetectable using other methods.
Thus, microlensing can provide an important addition to the
other methods in an effort to create a representative map of exo-planets in our galaxy and beyond.
The vast majority of exoplanets discovered orbit a single
star. This is perhaps an artifact of our detection methods as it
is estimated that as many as 50% of the stars in our galaxy
are part of binary or multiple star systems.
7A planet that
orbits two stars is called a circumbinary planet and the sys-
tem a circumbinary system. The ﬁrst such exoplanet was dis-
covered using pulsar timing.8About 20 circumbinary planets
have so far been discovered using different methods. The
ﬁrst circumbinary planet discovered using microlensing was
found in 20169and it is the only one to date.
Detecting circumbinary planets using microlensing
presents both observational and theoretical challenges.While solving a single lens equation is trivial, adding more
bodies signiﬁcantly increases the complexity. General Nlens
systems have been studied using a linear approximation ofthe lens equation and the method of inverse polygon map-
ping.
10This very fast method allows the calculation of
microlensing magniﬁcation patterns and has led to the devel-opment of a pedagogically valuable interactive simulation.
11
The explorations of analogue optical systems for gravita-
tional lensing that allow the direct study of multiple gravita-
tional lens systems12,13should also be noted.
182 Am. J. Phys. 91(3), March 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 182 04 October 2023 22:50:06
Double lens systems have been well studied theoreti-
cally.14,15Triple lens systems that include circumbinary sys-
tems involve even more parameters (ﬁve instead of two) anda much more complex system of equations, making a theo-retical exploration challenging.
A general three lens system is not analytically tractable.
One method is to use symmetries that simplify the problem as
in Refs. 20and 21. Perturbation theory
15,16is a different
approach that has been studied. More often, the structure of thecaustics, curves where the magniﬁcation diverges, is studied,such as in the work of Dan /C20ek and Heyrovsk /C19y who explored the
parameter space of triple gravitational lenses using a combina-tion of analytical and numerical methods.
17–19
One star–two (or multiple) planet systems have received the
most attention22,23with the planets usually treated in a pertur-
bative way. Some star–planet–moon systems have also beenstudied.24Circumbinary systems have been studied less.
Examples include Refs. 25and26with the latter examining
circumbinary caustics for a large range of the parameter space.
The goal of this paper is to provide an exploration of the
parameter space of circumbinary systems using a direct andexact method. Instead of caustics, we study full magniﬁca-tion maps and light curves. A combination of an analyticalapproach developed ﬁrst by Witt and Mao
27for binary lenses
and a numerical one using Mathematica are utilized. Themethod can be easily used by undergraduate students to gen-erate both magniﬁcation maps and light curves.
The paper starts with a pedagogical introduction to the lens
e q u a t i o ni nS e c . 