Inge V istnes ; Joakim Bergli
Am. J. Phys.  90, 20–30 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0006613
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A note on fluctuations of weak gravitational radiation and the classical Hanbury Brown–T wiss ef fect
J. Math. Phys.  (February 1984)
Hanbury Brown and T wiss Noise Correlations to Probe the Statistics of GHz Photons Emitted by Quantum
Conductors
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2005)
Measuring mode indices of a partially coherent vortex beam with Hanbury Brown and T wiss type
experiment
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (February 2016) 04 October 2023 22:59:31
Hanbury Brown and Twiss effect demonstrated for sound waves
from a waterfall: An experimental, numerical, and analytical study
Arnt Inge Vistnesa)and Joakim Berglib)
Department of Physics, University of Oslo, Sem Sælands vei 24, Oslo 3, Norway
(Received 2 November 2020; accepted 17 September 2021)
Hanbury Brown and Twiss determined the angular size of a visible light source (the star Sirius)
by studying how the cross-correlation in intensity ﬂuctuation recorded by two detectors changeswith the distance between the detectors. We ﬁnd that this principle works equally well for sound
waves from a waterfall. This is remarkable, since sound is a completely different kind of wave
from the HBT case. The frequency of the waves differs by a factor /C2410
12and the wavelength as
well as the angular extension of the source seen from the observer’s position differ by a factor
/C24107. Our analysis is based on the general properties of broadband waves. We start with
broadband waves at the amplitude level (not at intensity level) and demonstrate a HBT-likeeffect. We follow up with an explanation and demonstrations showing how the effect also
manifests itself at the intensity level, providing a bridge to the original HBT work. We use the
same reasoning in our numeric and analytical treatments, as well as in the experimental work,with identical results. The presentation is simple enough to be introduced even for second year
bachelor students. Computer programs (in Matlab), including software for time-resolved
frequency analysis, as well as original sound ﬁles are available from the authors.
#2022 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006613
I. INTRODUCTION
In the 1950s, Hanbury Brown and Twiss (HBT) developed
a method where the angular extent of objects in the sky could
be determined from time variation in intensity measurements
at two nearby radio telescopes.1When the telescopes were
close to each other, the signals detected by the two tele-
scopes were highly correlated, but the correlation dropped
considerably as the distance between the telescopes
increased. The angular extent of the source could be calcu-
lated from these data using a classical statistical wavedescription.
Soon after, the method was also used at optical wave-
lengths for the measurement of the angular diameter of the
star Sirius.2,3The fact that the HBT effect also arises at opti-
cal wavelengths, where the quantum nature of the electro-
magnetic ﬁeld should be important, was initially resisted by
physicists and astronomers.4However, after Glauber derived
the quantum theory of optical coherence,5many physicists
now consider the HBT effect to be a true quantum phenome-
non arising from “photon bunching.” Since the quantum as
well as the semi-classical explanations of the phenomenon
(see, e.g., Ref. 6) are rather complex, both conceptually and
mathematically, the effect is considered unsuitable for theundergraduate physics curriculum. While the HBT method is
no longer widely used in its original context, it is commonly
used in high energy physics,7providing motivation for intro-
ducing it to students in courses treating wave phenomena.
Numerical modeling has lately been introduced at the
undergraduate level. It often makes complex physics topics
easier to handle than theory alone, making such topics more
relevant and interesting for students.8In this paper, we use
numerical modeling to study the HBT effect. We believe
that this leads to a better understanding, not only of the HBT
effect, but of broadband waves in general. By “broadband
waves” we mean waves that have a broad continuous fre-
quency distribution, in contrast to simple harmonic waves.If undergraduate courses treat only the latter, students’
appreciation of the richness of wave phenomena will be seri-ously limited.
At the University of Oslo, numerical modeling of the HBT
effect was used as a one week student project for secondyear undergraduates in an oscillations and waves coursetaught in spring 2014.
9Numerical modeling of the HBT
effect for light was also utilized as a part of a lab for under-
graduates at Brigham Young University in 2015.10
There are key differences between a harmonic wave and a
broadband wave. A single source may generate broadband
waves, but often, broadband waves are a sum of the radiation
from many independent sources. The HBT effect appears insituations where many broadband waves add to each other at
the position of the detectors. The summation of waves is
slightly different at detector A’s position compared to detec-tor B’s position when the detectors are separated. One exam-
ple is electromagnetic waves emitted by a star, as was
studied in the original HBT experiment. To illustrate theeffect, we have performed experiments on sound waves from
a waterfall as a more accessible acoustic analogue.
Since broadband waves are central throughout this paper,
we will ﬁrst take a closer look at their characteristicproperties.
