INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| AUGUST 01 2022
A simple setup for the determination of the cosmic muon
magnetic moment 
Damir Bosnar  
 ; Mihael Makek  
 ; Zoran Matić
Am. J. Phys.  90, 635–640 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0077280
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A microchip microcontroller-based transducer controller for non-contact scanning probe microscopy with
phase-locked loop, amplitude, and Q control
Rev. Sci. Instrum.  (February 2020)
The Borexino muon detector and muon induced backgrounds
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2002)
Muon sources
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2000) 04 October 2023 23:14:49
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
A simple setup for the determination of the cosmic muon
magnetic moment
Damir Bosnara)and Mihael Makekb)
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Croatia
Zoran Matic ´
Atir d.o.o., Zagreb, Croatia
(Received 1 November 2021; accepted 7 April 2022)
We present a simple setup for the measurement of the magnetic moment of cosmic muons
convenient for a student laboratory experiment. A signiﬁcant simpliﬁcation is made in the detector
system compared to previous experiments of this kind, yet it retains all the necessary functionality
of the system. This simpliﬁcation additionally allows for the use of low-cost custom-madeelectronics for data readout and storage. These improvements considerably reduce the cost and
provide a more accessible setup for a student laboratory experiment.
#2022 Published under an exclusive
license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0077280
I. INTRODUCTION
Measurements of the properties of cosmic muons provide
excellent opportunities for educational experiments in ele-mentary particle physics. A classic and very popular exampleis the muon lifetime measurement, an experiment that hasbeen conducted in numerous variations using standardnuclear physics equipment (see, for example, a recent reviewgiven by Riggi et al.
1) and also with more accessible low-
cost electronics.2,3More complex measurements of the
muon mass have also more recently been performed.4,5
Conceptually and instrumentally much more demanding is
the measurement of the muon magnetic moment. Being apoint-like charged lepton that carries a unit electrical charge,
either positive or negative, and with a spin of 1/2 and a mass
of about 207 masses of the electron, the muon possesses amagnetic moment.
6One of the most effective and successful
measurements of the magnetic moment of cosmic muons asan educational experiment using standard nuclear physicsequipment was performed by Amsler.
7This measurement
exploits the non-conservation of parity in the production anddecay chain of muons, ﬁrst observed in the experiment ofGarwin et al. ,
8which was also the incentive for Amsler’s
experiment. In particular, as a consequence of parity viola-tion, there is a net polarization of cosmic muons that have
been stopped in a material at Earth’s surface. By putting this
material in a known magnetic ﬁeld, the spins of the stoppedmuons precess in the ﬁeld. The spins of the muons are corre-lated with the direction of the positrons (electrons) emittedin the muon decays. By measuring the distribution ofpositrons (electrons) in a certain direction as a function of
time, it is possible to determine the precession frequency of
the muons and from this, the magnetic moment of the muon.
Our measurement is based on the same idea, but the detec-
tor system is simpliﬁed to the bare minimum of only onescintillation detector. Instead of using standard nuclear and
particle physics equipment, low-cost electronics is used for
the processing and recording of the signals from the scintilla-tion detector developed for a simple system for muon life-
time measurement.
3
In Sec. 