IONAL PHYSICS| JUNE 01 2022
Introducing simple models of social systems 
Pablo Jensen
Am. J. Phys.  90, 462–468 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0086028
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
The coef ficient of restitution for collisions of happy balls, unhappy balls, and tennis balls
American Journal of Physics  (November 2000)
Happy Balls, Unhappy Balls, and Newton's Cradle
The Physics T eacher  (March 2010)
A formal method for categorizing unhappy users in social network using novel sentimental direct and in-
direct feedback comparing logistic regression over random forest
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023) 04 October 2023 23:11:08
COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS
The Computational Physics Section publishes articles that help students and instructors learn about the com-
putational tools used in contemporary research. Interested authors are encouraged to send a proposal to theeditors of the Section, Jan Tobochnik (jant@kzoo.edu) or Harvey Gould (hgould@clarku.edu). Summarize
the physics and the algorithm you wish to discuss and how the material would be accessible to advanced
undergraduates or beginning graduate students.
Introducing simple models of social systems
Pablo Jensena)
Laboratoire de Physique, Institut Rh ^onalpin des Systemes Complexes, IXXI, Universit /C19e de Lyon, ENS de Lyon,
UCB Lyon 1, CNRS, F-69342 Lyon, France
(Received 21 January 2022; accepted 16 February 2022)
Learning to model social systems can foster critical thinking about the applications of
mathematical methods to social issues and also lead to professional opportunities. I introduce an
intriguing simple model proposed by Thomas Schelling to understand urban segregation. It shows
that even when individual agents seek mixed neighborhoods, they can collectively create asegregated city that makes everyone unhappy. The model can be presented as a simple role-playing
game or by a computer program. At a more advanced level, the methods of statistical physics
provide a way to calculate equilibrium states corresponding to segregated conﬁgurations. I alsodiscuss why physics inspired models have difﬁculties in understanding the complex dynamics of
real social systems.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0086028
I. INTRODUCTION
Many physicists have contributed to the emerging ﬁeld of
computational social science1by studying simple models of
social systems (for reviews, see Refs. 2–4). Social networks
and digital devices provide trajectories that leave digitaltrails, just as particles in a bubble chamber leave trails oftheir trajectories, creating an abundance of data that form thebasis for mathematical approaches to social systems. Social
modeling is also an essential component of the work by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Integratedassessment models
5try to understand how human behavior
inﬂuences climate change and how to reduce emissions in anefﬁcient way. Teaching about simple social models, both atthe undergraduate and graduate levels, helps develop intui-
tion about social systems and fosters critical thinking about
their analysis by formal methods.
In this paper, I discuss an intriguing and popular model
proposed by the economist Thomas Schelling in the late1960s and then widely studied by scientists from manyﬁelds, including physicists. As discussed in Sec. 