Interested In
Quantized point vortex equilibria in a one-way interaction model with a Liouville-type background vorticity
on a curved torus
J. Math. Phys.  (June 2022)
A conformal variational approach for helices in nature
J. Math. Phys.  (October 2009)
Stereographic variables for multidimensional quantum group covariant q -oscillators
J. Math. Phys.  (June 2001) 04 October 2023 23:18:35
Stereographic projection to and from the Bloch sphere: Visualizing
solutions of the Bloch equations and the Bloch–Riccati equation
David J. Siminovitcha)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Lethbridge, Lethbridge, Alberta T1K 3M4
(Received 21 February 2022; accepted 4 June 2022)
Stereographic projection mapping is typically introduced to explain the point at inﬁnity in the
complex plane. After this brief exposure in the context of complex analysis, students rarely get anopportunity to fully appreciate stereographic projection mapping as an elegant and powerful
technique on its own with many fruitful applications in the physical sciences. Here, using a
classical description of nuclear magnetic resonance in the rotating frame, I show how stereographicprojection mapping to and from the Bloch sphere can be used for visualizing solutions to Bloch’s
equation and the Bloch–Riccati equation, respectively. After developing the fundamentals of
stereographic projection mapping using examples drawn from nuclear spin precession in therotating frame, the method is then applied to visualizations of composite pulse excitation of a spin-
1/2 system and to radiation damping in a system of isolated spins-1/2. In the case of the radiation-
damped system, these visualizations provide particularly vivid illustrations of loxodromic M €obius
transformation dynamics.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics
Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0088987
I. INTRODUCTION
Stereographic projection has proven to be a versatile and
elegant technique to solve problems in the mathematical andphysical sciences.1If physics students encounter stereo-
graphic projection at all, they most likely do so in mathemat-
ics2or mathematical physics3courses. These courses
introduce the Riemann sphere (alias Bloch sphere)4onto
which the entire complex plane can be mapped via stereo-graphic projection. From such a brief exposure to stereo-graphic projection, an exposure which is usually without anyphysics context, students might be tempted to think that ste-reographic projection has very few interesting or usefulapplications in physics.
A very different perspective is offered by a number of
insightful applications of stereographic projection mapping
to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
5–10and to optical
resonance,11and this article can be used as an introduction
to these applications. I will use the classical description ofNMR
12–14to illustrate fundamental features of stereo-
graphic projection mapping and to provide examples ofhow the technique can be applied to challenging NMRproblems. The Bloch equations
15are the equations of
motion of nuclear magnetization, whereas the Bloch–Riccati equation is obtained from the Bloch equations bystereographic projection mapping.
5–9With only the aid of
stereographic projection mapping, three-dimensionalgeometry, and complex analysis, solutions to the Bloch–
Riccati equation and Bloch’s equations may be visualized.
I will compare Bloch–Riccati equation solutions obtainedvia stereographic projection from both poles of the Blochsphere and show how these projection solutions are relatedby geometric inversion in the complex plane. The stereo-graphic projection mapping approach is then applied toprovide (i) an alternative visualization of NMR compositepulse excitation in the presence of a resonance offset
16,17
and (ii) a visualization of radiation damping7in an isolated
spin-1/2 system.