INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| MARCH 01 2022
Measuring the speed of light using optical feedback from a
picosecond diode laser 
Abdulaziz M. Aljalal
Am. J. Phys.  90, 21 1–217 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0007144
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Speed of light measurement with a picosecond diode laser and a voltage-controlled oscillator
Am. J. Phys.  (December 2022)
Michelson interferometry with a diode laser
Am. J. Phys.  (May 2022)
A pulser circuit for measuring the speed of light
American Journal of Physics  (September 1987) 04 October 2023 23:04:27
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
The downloaded PDF for any Note in this section contains all the Notes in this section.
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, and
how they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to theIL&D editor for consideration.
Measuring the speed of light using optical feedback from a picosecond
diode laser
Abdulaziz M. Aljalala)
Physics Department, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
(Received 1 May 2021; accepted 21 October 2021)
An experiment for measuring the speed of light by measuring the distance between regularly
generated optical pulses is described. The experiment utilizes optical feedback from a visiblepicosecond diode laser to accurately determine the distance between two successive laser pulses.
The required setup is compact, and it does not implement either a fast detector or an oscilloscope.
This experiment is suitable for an undergraduate physics instructional laboratory course or as anindependent student project.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics
Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0007144
I. INTRODUCTION
The speed of light in vacuum cis one of the most impor-
tant physical constants. The ﬁrst successful attempt to mea-sure cdates back to 1675, when Roemer used the eclipses of
the innermost moon of Jupiter for estimating the travel time
of light across the diameter of Earth’s orbit.1Over the years,
many different techniques have been developed to determinethe speed of light with increasing accuracy. However,since1983, the International System of Units has ﬁxed cto
be 299 792 458 m s
/C01, and the meter is deﬁned as the dis-
tance traveled by light in vacuum during a time interval of 1/
299 792 458 of a second.2Although the speed of light is no
longer measured for metrological purposes, measuring sucha very high speed is still instructive and appealing for under-graduate physics students.
3–15
There are many methods available to physics undergradu-
ates for measuring the speed of light, most of which involvemeasuring the delay time of a light pulse over a certain dis-tance or the time delay within an intensity-modulated light
beam. These techniques differ in the way they generate the
light pulse or the intensity-modulated light beam, as well asin the way they measure the delay time. In 1849, Fizeaucleverly used a slotted rotating wheel to generate light pulsesand, at the same time, to measure their time delays.
3In 1862,
Foucault, whose method is still implemented in physicsteaching labs, instead used a rotating mirror.4,5Among mod-
ern ways of generating short light pulses are a pulsed laser,6,7
a pulsed light emitting diode,8,9and a continuous wave laser
with an acousto-optic modulator10or a Pockels’s cell.11The
time delay of a light pulse is usually measured using a lightdetector with an oscilloscope,6–10but the delay can also be
measured using a light detector with a multichannel ana-
lyzer.11An intensity-modulated light beam can be produced
by modulating the injection current of a laser12–14or a light-
emitting diode,15–18or by using a Doppler-modulated
laser.19Typically, the modulation frequency is high (on the
order of tens of MHz).4The time delay or the phase shift
within the modulated light beam is usually measured by con-
verting the detected high-frequency modulated signal into alow-frequency signal accessible to a simple oscillo-scope,
13,14,16–18a loudspeaker,12or a voltmeter.15The con-
version is accomplished by multiplying the detected signalwith an electric reference signal of frequency very close to
the modulation frequency. The low-pass ﬁltered output is a
signal of frequency equal to the difference between the mod-ulated and the reference signals.
In pedagogical use, an experiment based on measuring the
delay time of a light pulse is simpler conceptually for stu-dents to understand than the one based on measuring the
phase shift of an intensity-modulated light beam. To obtain a
reasonable accuracy in the speed of light measurement withlight pulses, one needs either to use long distances
3or fast
detectors connected to fast oscilloscopes.6For a typical
teaching laboratory, long distances are not a good option ornot available, and fast oscilloscopes are quite expensive.
This work describes a compact setup for determining the
speed of light to an accuracy of 0.03% without the need forfast detectors or oscilloscopes. When a beamsplitter reﬂects
a beam of a picosecond laser to the laser, optical feedback
can occur and, as a result, it can alter the average power of
211 Am. J. Phys. 90(3), March 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 211 04 October 2023 23:04:27
the laser. Feedback occurs when the distance between the
laser and the beamsplitter is an integer multiple of half thedistance between successive laser pulses. Thus, the timebetween two picosecond laser pulses can be determined bymeasuring the distance between the laser and the beamsplit-ter. Using slow detectors to measure fast optical pulses iscommonly employed in autocorrelators, which map ultrafastoptical pulses into the spatial dimension by using nonlinearmedia instead of feedback.
