Interested In
On the cohomology of Leibniz conformal algebras
J. Math. Phys.  (April 2015)
On the Leibniz bracket, the Schouten bracket and the Laplacian
J. Math. Phys.  (May 2004)
On a class of n-Leibniz deformations of the simple Filippov algebras
J. Math. Phys.  (February 201 1) 04 October 2023 22:50:03
A shorter path to some action variables
Juan F . Zanella B /C19eguelina)
Departamento de F /C19ısica, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires,
Ciudad Universitaria, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina
(Received 5 August 2022; accepted 13 January 2023)
This paper shows how to apply Leibniz’s integral rule to calculate the action variables for the
Kepler problem. This method offers an attractive alternative to the usual technique of complex
contour integration. The method presented here to calculate deﬁnite integrals has a broad scope andis especially suitable for undergraduates who are unfamiliar with complex analysis.
#2023 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0118683
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper presents a method of calculating the action var-
iables in the Kepler problem that is simple and concise
enough to use during a lecture. The method, commonly
known as Feynman’s trick,1is based on Leibniz’s rule for
differentiating an integral.2–5It is a powerful tool for the
evaluation of deﬁnite integrals in that it can be simpler thancontour integration. Furthermore, its scope goes far beyondaction variables; for numerous examples and variations, seeRef. 1.
The idea is certainly as old as calculus, dating back to
Leibniz. It was brought back to light following the circulation
of Feynman’s memoir “Surely you’re joking, Mr. Feynman!”.As he recalled:
That book
3also showed how to differentiate
parameters under the integral sign … It turns outthat’s not taught very much in the universities …So because I was self-taught using that book, I hadpeculiar methods of doing integrals.
The result was, when guys at MIT or Princeton
had trouble doing a certain integral, it was becausethey couldn’t do it with the standard methods … Ifit was contour integration, they would have foundit; if it was a simple series expansion, they would
have found it. Then I come along and try
differentiating under the integral sign, and often itworked. So I got a great reputation for doingintegrals.
6
While students should be able to integrate without the aid
of tables or symbolic manipulators, those who put too muchconﬁdence in symbolic computation systems may be unableto discern whether or not the answers given by such systemsare sound. Feynman’s trick gives students another tool totackle difﬁcult integrals. It can also be very useful in class-
room settings, since without a simple method to compute the
Kepler action variables, a lecturer must choose between twounappealing options: carrying out the calculation in detail(which may lose the students’ attention) or stating the resultwithout derivation (which may leave students feeling dissat-isﬁed). Using Feynman’s trick, however, the action variablescan be calculated almost immediately.
This paper is organized as follows: Sec. 