IONAL PHYSICS| JUNE 01 2023
Simulating gravitational motion, gas dynamics, and
structure in the cosmos
J. W. Powell ; L. Caudill ; O. Young
Am. J. Phys.  91, 478 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0144906
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Comparison of CORSIKA and COSMOS simulations
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 201 1)
IRAC Deep Survey Of COSMOS
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2007)
Model of an Oscillating Cosmos which Rejuvenates during Contraction
J. Math. Phys.  (December 2004) 04 October 2023 22:53:08
COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS
The Computational Physics Section publishes articles that help students and instructors learn about the com-
putational tools used in contemporary research. Interested authors are encouraged to send a proposal to theeditors of the Section, Jan Tobochnik (jant@kzoo.edu) or Harvey Gould (hgould@clarku.edu). Summarize
the physics and the algorithm you wish to discuss and how the material would be accessible to advanced
undergraduates or beginning graduate students.
Simulating gravitational motion, gas dynamics, and structure
in the cosmos
J. W. Powell,a)L.Caudill,b)and O. Youngc)
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, Oregon 97201
(Received 8 December 2022; accepted 8 March 2023)
We provide introductory explanations and illustrations of the N-body hydrodynamics code Charm
N-body GrAvity solver (ChaNGa). ChaNGa simulates the gravitational motion and gas dynamics
of matter in space with the goal of modeling galactic and/or cosmological structure and evolution.
We discuss the algorithm for leapfrog integration and smoothed particle hydrodynamics andcomputer science concepts used by the program, including the binary data structure for the particle
positions. Our presentation borrows from the doctoral dissertation of J. Stadel, U. Washington,
2001. Problems are provided in order to use ChaNGa to learn or solidify some cosmologicalconcepts.
VC2023 Author(s) .All article content, except where otherwise noted, is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0144906
I. INTRODUCTION
N-body hydrodynamic simulations of the cosmos and iso-
lated galaxies1,2have been crucial in establishing Lambda
cold dark matter (Lambda refers to dark energy) as the stan-dard model of cosmology.3Due to the fundamental nature of
gravity, computationally challenging densities occur in astro-
physical situations. Simulations developed by several groups
have yielded trustworthy predictions of the incrediblydiverse structure of the cosmos and galaxies, and severalsimulations of very differing kinds have given the sameresults, thanks to the AGORA project.
4
ChaNGa (Charm N-body GrAvity solver) is an example
of a highly parallel N-body hydrodynamic code.5The phys-
ics of star formation, supernovae feedback, and cooling areincluded in ChaNGa.
Our goal is to provide an accessible, but thorough explana-
tion of how to use this N-body hydrodynamic code by addingto ChaNGa’s GitHub wiki
6and many YouTube presenta-
tions. We also hope to provide a deeper appreciation for how
computer science data structures are used to constructChaNGa. For example, ChaNGa is written in the parallelprogramming language CHARM þþ, which won a Gordon
Bell prize.
7Although we have not attempted to provide an
exhaustive description of the code, we focus on the detailsthat are most relevant to the physics.
Sections 