IONAL PHYSICS| MARCH 01 2022
Quantifying biomolecular diffusion with a “spherical cow”
model 
Frederico Campos Freitas ; Sandra Byju ; Asem Hassan ; Ronaldo Junio de Oliveira ; Paul C. Whitford
Am. J. Phys.  90, 225–238 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0075952
 CHORUS
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Drift-dif fusion (DrDif f) framework determines kinetics and thermodynamics of two-state folding trajectory
and tunes dif fusion models
J. Chem. Phys.  (September 2019)
Biogas production from co-digestion of cocoa pod husk and cow manure with cow rumen fluid as inoculum
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 2020)
Agrivoltaics to shade cows in a pasture-based dairy system
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2022) 04 October 2023 23:04:57
COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS
The Computational Physics Section publishes articles that help students and instructors learn about the com-
putational tools used in contemporary research. Interested authors are encouraged to send a proposal to theeditors of the Section, Jan Tobochnik (jant@kzoo.edu) or Harvey Gould (hgould@clarku.edu). Summarize
the physics and the algorithm you wish to discuss and how the material would be accessible to advanced
undergraduates or beginning graduate students.
Quantifying biomolecular diffusion with a “spherical cow” model
Frederico Campos Freitas,1,a)Sandra Byju,2,b)Asem Hassan,2
Ronaldo Junio de Oliveira,1,c)and Paul C. Whitford2,d)
1Laborat /C19orio de Biof /C19ısica Te /C19orica, Departamento de F /C19ısica, Instituto de Ci ^encias Exatas,
Naturais e Educac ¸~ao, Universidade Federal do Tri ^angulo Mineiro, Uberaba, MG, Brazil
2Department of Physics and Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Northeastern University,
360 Huntington Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
(Received 20 October 2021; accepted 20 October 2021)
The dynamics of biological polymers, including proteins, RNA, and DNA, occur in very high-
dimensional spaces. Many naturally occurring polymers can navigate a vast phase space and
rapidly ﬁnd their lowest free energy (folded) state. Thus, although the search process is stochastic,
it is not completely random. Instead, it is best described in terms of diffusion along a downhillenergy landscape. In this context, there have been many efforts to use simpliﬁed representations of
the energetics, for which the potential energy is chosen to be a relatively smooth function with a
global minimum that corresponds to the folded state. That is, instead of including every type ofphysical interaction, the broad characteristics of the landscape are encoded in approximate energy
functions. We describe a particular class of models, called structure-based models, that can be used
to explore the diffusive properties of biomolecular folding and conformational rearrangements.These energy functions may be regarded as the spherical cow for modeling molecular biophysics.
We discuss the physical principles underlying these models and provide an entry-level tutorial,
which may be adapted for use in curricula for physics and non-physics majors.
#2022 Published under
an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0075952
I. INTRODUCTION
When studying a complex system, physicists will typically
begin by proposing a highly simpliﬁed model that includes afew relevant properties of the system. The broad utilization
of this strategy inspired the well-known joke in the physics
community regarding a spherical cow, with several examplesof this approach immortalized by a book entitled by thejoke.
1That is, when studying a cow, a physicist’s ﬁrst
approximation is to represent the cow by a sphere of uniformmass and charge density. Starting with this spherical cow,
physicists will then investigate the properties of the simpli-
ﬁed system before considering additional details. By itera-tively introducing new features, complex physical systemscan be understood at ever-increasing levels of detail. In con-trast to this approach, traditional biological studies aim to
provide broad characterizations (e.g., structures and rates) of
detailed systems (e.g., molecules in a cell). Thus, at ﬁrstglance, it may not be obvious how physicists can effectivelyapply the spherical cow philosophy to biology.
In the following, we will discuss a spherical cow approach
to studying molecular biophysics. Speciﬁcally, we willexplain the ideas behind a class of potential energy functions
called structure-based models.
2–4These models exploit the
phenomenological features of biomolecules to provide a sim-pliﬁed version of the energetics. To understand the value ofthese models, it is necessary to recognize that molecular biol-
ogy techniques can provide only atomic-resolution descrip-tions of long-lived stable structures of biomolecules.
Accordingly, these conﬁgurations must correspond to deep (at
least several k
BT) free energy minima. Inspired by this simple
observation, structure-based models explicitly deﬁne experi-mental conﬁgurations to be stable. That is, the baseline ver-
sions of these models do not aim to identify the factors that
impart stability. Rather, interactions formed in the native(ground state) conﬁgurations are deﬁned to be stabilizing, and
all other interactions are treated as repulsive, which ensures
that the spatial arrangements are preserved. Given the crudecharacter of the models, it may be surprising that these simpli-
ﬁed representations have been able to model a broad range of
biomolecular processes, ranging from protein folding
2,5–7to
the dynamics of protein synthesis by the ribosome.8–10
We ﬁrst provide a brief introduction to molecular biology
for physics students, followed by a description of simulation
techniques and structure-based models. We additionally dis-
cuss example calculations that can be adopted and integratedin advanced undergraduate or graduate-level physics
courses. Our intent is to provide students (and instructors)
with a basic understanding of the biological context andphysical principles. To facilitate the adoption of this mate-
rial, we provide a repository with step-by-step instructions
on how to apply the models to simulations.
225 Am. J. Phys. 90(3), March 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 225 04 October 2023 23:04:57
