Interested In
Acoustical Properties of Carpet
J Acoust Soc Am  (June 2005)
Acoustical Properties of Carpet
J Acoust Soc Am  (June 2005)
Comparison of Reverberation ‐ Room and Impedance T ube Measurements on Carpets
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005) 04 October 2023 22:48:41
The drift motion of a spinning ball on carpet
Keith Zengela)and Chris Tamer
Wentworth Institute of Technology, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
(Received 16 May 2022; accepted 22 October 2022)
A ball that rolls on carpet while also spinning around a vertical axis will experience a drift force that
acts perpendicular to its velocity, opposite to the tangential velocity component of the front point of theball. Here, we present a model of this motion based on three assumptions: the ball rolls without slipping
around the point of contact directly below its center of mass; the ball experiences rolling resistance
due to a forward-shifted normal force; and the ball experiences a forward-shifted kinetic friction (drift)
force. This model produces a simple analytic solution that is consistent with experimental data.
Our measurements suggest that the kinetic friction force acts near the front of the contact patch betweenthe ball and carpet.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0099316
I. INTRODUCTION
The literature on the motion of a rolling ball that spins
about the vertical axis is limited to a handful of qualitative
descriptions.1,2A phenomenon of similar appearance is the
“hook” motion of a bowling ball, though this is explained by
the slipping motion of the ball.3,4The motion of spinning bil-
liards balls has been studied,5,6though often the emphasis is
on how a vertical spin might be imparted on a ball or on the
transition from sliding to rolling. Some work has been done
on the effect of a ball’s spin on its motion in a cylinder,7–10
though here the interesting behavior has to do with thecurved surface. Another closely analogous system is the
motion of a spinning curling stone11,12or hockey puck.13,14
In these systems, the kinetic friction force is modeled as
varying across the surface of the sliding cylinder in contact
with the ice, though obviously neither object rolls without
slipping.
With the exception of Ref. 1, these papers all describe sys-
tems that differ from the spinning ball on the carpet system
described here. Reference 1provides many interesting
details, including the observations that the ball follows a
curved path, rolls without slipping, and continues spinning
even after it has stopped rolling. Here, we propose a model
for the curved path of the ball that includes rolling resistance
as well as kinetic friction. Rolling resistance emerges due to
a forward shift of the normal force along the direction of the
ball’s center-of-mass velocity.15,16We add to this model a
kinetic friction force, which also acts on the ball at a point
ahead of the center of mass but perpendicular to the ball’s
center of mass velocity and not necessarily at the same point
as the normal force. Our experimental results suggest that
the kinetic friction force acts near the front of the contact
region between the ball and carpet, which is consistent withcomputer model predictions of rolling friction.17
In general, there is not a “single” kinetic or static friction
force acting in the region where the ball contacts the sur-
face. A particle level model would account for the small
friction force acting on each small piece of the ball in con-
tact with the surface, similar to descriptions of the motion of
curling stones and hockey pucks.11–14However, this is also
true of the normal force in the case of rolling.17At the
particle-level, a small normal force acts on each small piece
of the ball in contact with the surface. The total normal force
is the sum of these small normal forces. The sum of the
torques due to these small normal forces results in anon-zero net torque and accounts for the “forward-shift” of
the normal force.
Here, we will make the same type of simplifying assump-
tion about the kinetic friction force. In this case, the kinetic
friction force is the sum of the small kinetic friction forces
on each piece of the ball in contact with the surface. The
total torque due to kinetic friction is also the sum of all the
small torques, which we assume is equivalent to the torquefrom a single forward-shifted kinetic friction force.
