Interested In
Zero trust model: A compelling strategy to strengthen the security posture of IT organizations
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2022)
Investigation of thermoelectric properties of chalcogenide semiconductors from first principles
J. Appl. Phys.  (June 201 1)
Impedance measurements in the ear canal
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005) 04 October 2023 23:19:10
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
A z-axis tunneling microscope for undergraduate labs
Randy Lindgren, Wesley Kozan, Noah Fuerst,a)Douglas Knapp,b)and Joshua P . Veazeyc)
Department of Physics, Grand Valley State University, Allendale, Michigan 49401
(Received 31 March 2022; accepted 8 July 2022)
We present the design and construction of a laboratory apparatus that provides advanced
undergraduates with hands-on observations of electron quantum tunneling and the electronic densityof states of various materials. The instrument is inspired by the scanning tunneling microscope
(STM), but its implementation is simpliﬁed by limiting the tip motion to the single dimension along
the tip-sample separation ( z-axis); we refer to the device as the z-axis tunneling microscope (ZTM).
Students are able to use the ZTM to measure electron tunneling probability as a function of barrier
width, estimate relative material work functions, and observe differences in local electronic
structure among metals, semimetals, and semiconductors. We share results obtained by third-yearundergraduate physics students using the instrument for their ﬁnal projects in an advanced
instructional lab course.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0094028
I. INTRODUCTION
First- and second-year undergraduate students often arrive
with enthusiasm for learning about the surprising effects of
quantum mechanics, including quantum tunneling. In course-
work, however, their initial interest may get bogged down by
abstract representations of the tunnel barrier. Studies of
material properties like electronic structure can also chal-
lenge students, because they are abstract and without many
experimental opportunities. Pictorial representations of
tunneling experiments, such as the scanning tunneling micro-
scope (STM), can relieve some abstraction. Many published
examples of homebuilt and student-built STMs have been
valuable for expanding access.1–4However, developing a
corresponding hands-on STM lab adds complexity, and anal-
ysis of images may distract from the core learning objectives
identiﬁed above.
We propose the following simpler solution for undergrad-
uate instructional labs: a tunneling microscope that only
moves the tip along the single axis deﬁned by the tip-sample
separation, an instrument we dub the z-axis tunneling micro-
scope (ZTM). A schematic and photo of the key components
of the ZTM are shown in Fig. 1. Unlike the STM, the ZTM’s
tip does not scan laterally; like the STM, the ZTM operates
in ambient conditions at room temperature. As indicated in
Fig.1by the voltages Vpiezoand preamp output, we designed
the instrument with the presumption that it would interface
with electronics and data acquisition equipment already
existing in undergraduate programs.Two main goals for the experiments facilitated by the
ZTM are the observation of the tunneling current’s exponen-
tial dependence on the tip-sample separation gap ( I-z) and
the observation of differences in the electronic structure
between various materials via tunneling spectroscopy. As we
will show in Secs. IV, the instrument accomplishes these
goals, and it can distinguish differences in electronic density
of states for different classes of conducting solids, e.g., met-als, semimetals, and semiconductors. Additionally, we have
used the instrument in a point contact spectroscopy mode.5
At our four-year, primarily undergraduate institution, third-year physics majors in an advanced instructional lab course
have worked with the fully assembled apparatus (pictured inFig.2), and some of their data are presented here. Given its
simplicity, the ZTM can be used in instructional labs at other
levels, beginning with the sophomore modern physicscourse.
