Interested In
Voltage is the Most Dif ficult Subject for Students in Physics by Inquiry's Electric Circuits Module
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2007)
Electric field lines: The implications of students' interpretation on their understanding of the concept of
electric field and of the superposition principle
Am. J. Phys.  (August 2019)
Improving Student Understanding of Coulomb’ s Law and Gauss’ s Law
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2007) 04 October 2023 22:54:50
Helping students apply superposition principle in problems involving
spherical, cylindrical, and planar charge distributions
Jing Li
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260
Alexandru Mariesa)
Department of Physics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45221
Chandralekha Singhb)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260
(Received 19 September 2022; accepted 2 June 2023)
We describe student difﬁculties in applying the superposition principle in combination with
Gauss’s law. We addressed these difﬁculties by developing a tutorial that uses guided inquiry.
Students who used this tutorial following lecture-based instruction performed signiﬁcantly better
on these topics than those who did not. Instructors can assign the tutorial as classwork orhomework.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0127127
I. INTRODUCTION
Gauss’s law is very challenging for students and using it
in combination with the superposition principle only adds
further layers of complexity. Understanding Gauss’s lawrequires understanding of the concepts of both electric ﬁeldand electric ﬂux, and prior work has uncovered some of thecommon difﬁculties students have with these concepts. Forexample, Li and Singh
1investigated student difﬁculties with
the electric ﬁeld and the superposition principle and used
these difﬁculties as resources for developing a tutorial toaddress these difﬁculties. The difﬁculties described includeconfusing electric ﬁeld and electric force, thinking that onlythe nearest point charge contributes to the electric ﬁeld at aspeciﬁc point, confusion due to the electric ﬁeld line repre-
sentation and interpretation of how to use it, and others.
Campos et al.
2investigated the difﬁculty involved in use-
fully interpreting the electric ﬁeld line representation to rea-son about the electric ﬁeld due to multiple charges andinferred from their ﬁndings that the use of this kind of repre-sentation may actually be detrimental with regard to helping
students develop a functional understanding of the concept
of electric ﬁeld. The student difﬁculty associated with think-ing that only the nearest charge contributes to the electricﬁeld at a speciﬁc point can also be found in a study by Garzaand Zavala.
3They found, for example, that many students
thought that a charged vertical bar would “cancel” the elec-
tric ﬁeld created by the point charge on its other side.
Student difﬁculties with the electric ﬁeld and superpositionprinciple have also been described in the context of continu-ous charge distributions
4and were addressed in a tutorial.
Student difﬁculties with electric ﬂux and Gauss’s law (andsymmetry) have also been investigated
5–8and used to
develop both a 25-item multiple choice test on these con-
cepts6as well as a tutorial to address the common student
difﬁculties.7Other investigation shows that Gauss’s law is so
challenging that students in an upper-level electricity andmagnetism course often continue to struggle with using it toreason about the electric ﬁeld caused by continuous charge
distributions.
8
Here, we describe student difﬁculties and how they were
used as a guide for the development and evaluation of atutorial to help students learn to apply the superposition prin-
ciple in problem contexts involving spherical, cylindrical,and planar charge distributions. The types of problems stu-dents were asked to solve using the superposition principleto ﬁnd the net electric ﬁeld involved complex situations such
as “two adjacent spheres with charge uniformly distributed
over their surfaces” or “an inﬁnite cylinder with uniform sur-face charge adjacent to a point charge.” Students struggledwith these problems in which Gauss’s law is not useful toﬁnd the electric ﬁeld due to the entire charge distribution in“one go.”
In Secs. 