INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| JANUARY 01 2022
Determination of density profile by using the refractive index
in a linearly salt-stratified fluid: An experiment for an
advanced undergraduate laboratory 
R. C. Cruz-Gómez ; F. A. V elázquez-Muñoz ; J. Salcedo-Castro
Am. J. Phys.  90, 71–77 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0006353
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
An Example of Refractography
Physics T oday  (September 2019)
Binarizing Low Resolution Images
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2006)
Efficient binarizing split learning based deep models for mobile applications
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 2021) 04 October 2023 23:00:34
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
Determination of density profile by using the refractive index
in a linearly salt-stratified fluid: An experiment for an advanced
undergraduate laboratory
R. C. Cruz-G /C19omeza)
Departamento de F /C19ısica, Universidad de Guadalajara, Blvd. Marcelino Garc /C19ıa Barrag /C19an y Calzada Ol /C19ımpica,
C.P. 44840 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico
F. A . Vel/C19azquez-Mu ~noz
Departamento de F /C19ısica, Universidad de Guadalajara, Blvd. Marcelino Garc /C19ıa Barrag /C19an y Calzada Ol /C19ımpica,
C.P. 44840 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico
J.Salcedo-Castro
Sino-Australian Research Consortium for Coastal Management, School of Science, University of New South
Wales, Canberra, Australia
(Received 6 April 2021; accepted 30 August 2021)
This paper describes a low-cost laboratory experiment designed to demonstrate the applicability of
the refractive index to study stratiﬁcation in ﬂuids. The laser refractography method was applied to
a linearly vertical density proﬁle of a salt (NaCl) stratiﬁed water column. Next, an image
processing procedure was performed, consisting of the binarization and edge detection of the laserbeam and its subsequent second-order polynomial best ﬁt. Quantitatively, the whole-ﬁeld results
compared well with the respective measured density proﬁles. This method allows one to obtain
quantitative measurements of density proﬁles in stratiﬁed ﬂuids with good accuracy, making it asuitable experimental method for laboratory demonstrations on ﬂuids.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006353
I. INTRODUCTION
In spite of being a very interesting physical process, the
bending of a light ray as it crosses a nonhomogeneous strati-ﬁed ﬂuid is an unfamiliar phenomenon to most students.
Commonly, undergraduate students may be introduced to
such physical concepts in advanced laboratory courses.Here, we investigate this phenomenon experimentally by
observing the deviation of a light ray crossing a transparent
nonhomogeneous stratiﬁed ﬂuid, where the nonhomogeneityis due to a variation of the refractive index. In laboratory
experiments, an increase in a ﬂuid’s density is may be
obtained by the addition of different substances. Thus, ﬂuidlayers of increasing density can be introduced into a tank, for
example, by using salt or sugar solutions of progressively
increasing concentration. As a result, this process also varies
the optical refractive index nwithin the ﬂuid, where nis a
fundamental parameter that enables us to determine otherproperties of the medium (e.g., its density gradient ﬁeld).
Quantifying density gradients in stratiﬁed ﬂuids is a topic
of interest in many ﬁelds of science. For example, in oceanog-
raphy, there are physical and biological processes affected bythe salinity/density gradient of seawater; salinity is also of cru-
cial importance for biological productivity, especially in estu-aries.
1In many geophysical problems, ﬂuid ﬂows are
characterized by the presence of a stable vertical density gra-dient. A large variety of processes in the atmosphere and
ocean are signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by stratiﬁcation effects. In
practice, density is not measured directly in the ocean; instead,an equation of state based on temperature, salinity, and pres-sure is used. Conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) instru-ments are the most commonly used devices for implementingthese density proﬁle measurements. Finally, in industry, therelation between the density and refractive index is applied inthe monitoring of sugar content during distillation processes.
In a stratiﬁed ﬂuid, the density gradient is often of more
interest than the local value of the density. A classic case ofa miscible ﬂuid with a continuous density distribution is auniformly stratiﬁed ﬂuid with constant buoyancy. In a natu-
ral environment, the buoyancy period varies from a few
minutes to hours; in laboratory experiments, the buoyancyperiod is several seconds. In particular, the magnitude ofstratiﬁcation can be represented by the buoyancy frequency
N(z), also called the Brunt-V €ais€al€a frequency ,
71 Am. J. Phys. 90(1), January 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 71 04 October 2023 23:00:34
N2ðzÞ¼/C0g
q0@qz
@z; (1)
where gis the gravitational acceleration, q0is the reference
density, and qzis the background density as a function of
height z.
The relationship between the refractive index nand local
ﬂuid density qis a problem of no recent origin. This relation
can be expressed by the Lorentz–Lorenz equation2,3
n2/C01
qðn2þ2Þ¼constant : (2)
This equation arises in the study of refractivity, where the
constant is determined by a mean molecular polarizability of
the ﬂuid in response to an applied low-frequency electrical
ﬁeld, making it difﬁcult to obtain the value of nin many
cases.3Consequently, we will introduce a linear relationship
for a ﬂuid, whose density is changed by adding salt (NaCl).4
Then, we will be able to ﬁnd nby assuming a linear change
of density with depth, i.e., @qz=@z¼constant. There are
well-known measurement techniques, whereby a laser is
used to measure ﬂuid properties, such as particle image
velocimetry (PIV) and planar laser-induced ﬂuorescence
(PLIF).10On the other hand, experimental techniques that
take advantage of laser refractography are performed with
the help of the “synthetic” Schlieren method based on com-
puter evaluation of optical distortions in stratiﬁed ﬂuids.5In
the present paper, a laser refractography method is used to
investigate the effect of the density gradient on nin a linearly
stratiﬁed ﬂuid with the aim of evaluating this technique’s
applicability in experiments, where the density proﬁle needs
to be obtained in a nonintrusive way. Our objective is to
study the variation of the refractive index in a ﬁeld of a verti-
cally varying density induced by different salt concentrations
(NaCl). We will utilize this nonintrusive method to obtain a
density proﬁle in a linearly stratiﬁed stable ﬂuid under well-
controlled laboratory conditions using a laser beam. To ourknowledge, this method has been little exploited in advanced
ﬂuid dynamics laboratory experiments, despite its relatively
low-cost and ease of implementation.
