INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| DECEMBER 01 2022
Speed of light measurement with a picosecond diode laser
and a voltage-controlled oscillator 
Abdulaziz M. Aljalal  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 935–939 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0104758
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Measuring the speed of light using optical feedback from a picosecond diode laser
Am. J. Phys.  (March 2022)
Michelson interferometry with a diode laser
Am. J. Phys.  (May 2022)
Comment on “A study of the longitudinal laser modes of a semiconductor laser using optical coherence
tomography” [Am. J. Phys. 75 , 569–571 (2006)]
Am. J. Phys.  (September 2022) 04 October 2023 23:22:37
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
Speed of light measurement with a picosecond diode laser
and a voltage-controlled oscillator
Abdulaziz M. Aljalala)
Physics Department, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia
(Received 21 June 2022; accepted 18 September 2022)
This work describes an experimental method for measuring the speed of light in air. It uses optical
feedback from a visible picosecond diode laser operated below the threshold and a voltage-controlled
oscillator to determine the time required for a pulse to travel a known distance. The experimental
setup is compact, ﬁtting into a space of 1 /C20.5 m2, and at the same time, can determine the speed
of light with an uncertainty of 0.03%. The method does not require fast detectors or oscilloscopes.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0104758
I. INTRODUCTION
In a previous paper, I described a method for measuring
the speed of light in air using the feedback from a 50-ps
pulsed diode laser triggered by a ﬁxed and stable oscillatorof frequency 80 MHz.1A beamsplitter that reﬂects a portion
of the laser beam to the laser can cause optical feedback,
which can increase the average output power of the laser
when it is operating below threshold. Feedback occurs inpulsed lasers when an emitted pulse is reﬂected back into thecavity and overlaps with another pulse inside the cavity.
When the distance between the laser and the beam splitter
(labelled lin Fig. 1) is an integer multiple of half the separa-
tion between successive laser pulses, a reﬂected pulse
encounters a generated pulse at the laser. For a laser operat-
ing below the threshold, feedback occurs over a much nar-rower distance than the spatial width of the laser pulse itself,which is about 15 mm for a pulse of 50 ps duration. Thus,
one can accurately measure the speed of light in air vby ﬁnd-
ing the positions at which the average power of the laserpeaks due to optical feedback
v¼
2lm
mf: (1)
Here, m¼1;2;3…, and lmis the corresponding distance
between the laser and the beamsplitter when the feedback
signal peaks. For f¼80 MHz, l1¼1:88 m, l2¼3:75 m,
andl3¼5:62 m. Since the laser is small and located inside
its container, it is hard to accurately measure the distance
from the beamsplitter to the laser. One needs at least to
observe optical feedback at two different beamsplitter posi-tions to eliminate the need to measure distances from thelaser. For example, using the positions of the ﬁrst two
occurrences of the feedback signal, one can determine thespeed of light from v¼2l
2/C0l1 ðÞ f. Only the difference
between the locations of the beamsplitter when feedbackoccurs is required.
This paper presents a method to measure the speed of light
by employing the feedback from a pulsed picosecond diode
laser triggered by a voltage-controlled oscillator. The advan-
tage of using a variable frequency oscillator over a ﬁxed fre-quency one is that it enables determining the peak of thefeedback signal by scanning the oscillator frequency at aﬁxed beamsplitter position instead of scanning the beams-plitter position at a ﬁxed oscillator frequency. It is usuallyeasier to change the frequency of an oscillator than to change
the location of a beamsplitter on a motorized linear stage.
Also, a variable frequency oscillator is much cheaper than amotorized linear stage. Additionally, unlike a ﬁxed-frequency oscillator where only one beamsplitter positionsatisﬁes Eq. (1)form¼1, multiple beamsplitter positions
can fulﬁll Eq. (1)form¼1 for a variable-frequency oscilla-
tor. Thus, one needs only to know the relative distances
between these beamsplitter positions for m¼1 without
needing to use data for m¼2 to eliminate the need to mea-
sure the distance to the laser, resulting in a compact setup ofa length of about 1 m for pulse frequencies in the range of75 MHz. As in the method of a ﬁxed-frequency oscillator,this method does not require fast detectors or oscilloscopes.The work in this paper is suitable as an experiment for an
undergraduate lab or an independent student project. In addi-
tion to measure the speed of light in air accurately, by doingthis experiment, students may also learn more about pulseddiode lasers, variable-frequency oscillators, frequency coun-ters, computer interfacing, and error analysis.
935 Am. J. Phys. 90(12), December 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 935 04 October 2023 23:22:37
