Interested In
FPGA-oriented synthesis of multivalued logical networks
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2016)
Prediction of multivalued waveforms in media with power-law attenuation
J Acoust Soc Am  (April 2016)
Multivalued Fields
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2007) 04 October 2023 23:03:44
Multivalued specific heat
Matheus G. Pacheco,a)Reinaldo de Melo e Souza,b)
Instituto de F /C19ısica, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Avenida Litor ^anea s/n, CP 24210-346 Niter /C19oi,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Daniela Szilardc)
Instituto de F /C19ısica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
(Received 18 November 2020; accepted 11 October 2021)
Speciﬁc heat is usually analyzed only for common thermodynamic processes, leaving us with the
impression that it can always be expressed as a single-valued function of temperature. In thispaper, we show that speciﬁc heat functions may be multivalued even for processes that are
mathematically simple, such as an ideal gas following a linear path with a negative slope in the
pressure–volume diagram. Although this example has been studied previously, we show that themultivalued approach provides additional physical insights, and we establish the conditions that
any path must satisfy in order to have a single-valued speciﬁc heat. As a ﬁnal application of our
approach, we demonstrate a geometric theorem.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006899
I. INTRODUCTION
Heat capacity was introduced by Joseph Black around
1760 when modern thermodynamics was being developed.1
In modern notation, we deﬁne the heat capacity Cas
CðTÞ¼ lim
DT!0Q=DT; (1)
where Qis the heat associated with a temperature change
from TtoTþDT. The heat capacity is frequently a function
of temperature.
Black deﬁned this concept empirically. However, many
important advances emerged when physicists searched for
microscopic models of matter capable of predicting the heat
capacity. A landmark development was Dulong and Petit’sempirical recognition that the heat capacity per mole—the
molar speciﬁc heat c—is the same for all solids and equal to
approximately 3 R/C2525 J/(mol K), where Ris the ideal gas
constant.2–4This universality put physicists on the path to
the discovery of the equipartition theorem and the kinetic
theory of gases and led Boltzmann to propose a model of asolid as a set of independently oscillating atoms.1,5However,
Dulong and Petit’s law must be modiﬁed at low temperatures
where thermal energies are smaller than the quantum energylevel separation, and Einstein adapted Boltzmann’s model
by treating the harmonic motion of the atoms quantum
mechanically to explain the behavior of the speciﬁc heat ofsolids at low temperatures.
6This was arguably the departure
point of modern solid state physics. While it is not the pur-
pose of this paper to present a detailed historical account, weemphasize that the route to a proper understanding of spe-
ciﬁc heat led to some unexpected and important develop-
ments, as evidenced by the cited references.
It is well known that speciﬁc heat is path dependent, but
students usually only express it for ideal gases undergoing
isobaric or isochoric processes. In these cases, the molar spe-
ciﬁc heat ccan be used to evaluate the heat exchanged
through the expression
Q¼ð
T2
T1ncd T ; (2)where nis the number of moles present. However, one must
be cautious when applying Eq. (2)for an arbitrary case, since
a multivalued speciﬁc heat function might be required. Forexample, we will show that if an ideal gas follows a path in apressure–volume diagram that is a straight line with negativeslope; then, the speciﬁc heat is multivalued as a function oftemperature. This problem has been studied in the literatureand contains many interesting features, such as a segmentwhere heat enters in the system and another where it leaves.
7
Furthermore, in this process, we have a portion where thespeciﬁc heat is negative, and also a point where it changesabruptly from /C01 toþ1.
8,9An interesting geometrical
method has been devised to ﬁnd the point where the speciﬁcheat is zero in this process.10These authors circumvented
the need to employ a multivalued function by expressing thespeciﬁc heat as a function of volume instead of temperature.However, in order to evaluate the integral in Eq. (2),w e
need to express the speciﬁc heat as a function of temperature,which is not possible using a single-valued function. Similarproblems appear for more general processes, such as ellipti-cal cycles and parabolic paths.
11,12
The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, we explore the
conditions that a path must satisfy in order to have a single-valued speciﬁc heat. The intuitive answer is that the path ontheP–Vdiagram must not be tangent to an isotherm because
the temperature changes non-monotonically when movingthrough the tangency point, frequently resulting in points onopposite sides of the tangent point that have the same tem-perature but unequal speciﬁc heats. However, a careful dem-onstration of this result is subtle, and in Sec. 