Interested In
On the Eikonal equation in the pedestrian flow problem
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 2017)
Eikonal approximation and the parabolic equation
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 1976)
The Eikonal Approach to High Energy Scattering
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 1973) 04 October 2023 22:52:14
Applications of the eikonal approximation in quantum mechanical
scattering
Barry R. Holsteina)
Department of Physics-LGRT, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts 01003
(Received 4 November 2021; accepted 22 March 2023)
Scattering is an important component of any quantum mechanics course. However, the scattering
amplitude in the case of a general potential is often calculated using the simple Bornapproximation, which does not embed general properties such as unitarity or analyticity. We show
that a relatively simple extension, the eikonal approximation, offers a signiﬁcant improvement and
demonstrate this in the case of the electromagnetic and gravitational interactions.
#2023 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0077649
I. INTRODUCTION
A section on scattering is an important component of any
quantum mechanics course, whether at the undergraduate or
graduate level. By examining the asymptotic behavior of
scattering solutions to the Schr €odinger equation wðþÞ
kiðrÞfor a
particle of mass minteracting with the potential V, one
extracts the scattering amplitude as1
fðkf;kiÞ¼/C0m
2ph/kfj^VjwðþÞ
kii; (1)
whose square is the differential scattering cross section
dr
dX¼jfðkf;kiÞj2: (2)
An exact solution is not generally possible, so one often uses
the simple Born approximation, wherein the scattering solu-
tionjwðþÞ
kiiis replaced by a plane wave j/kii, i.e.,
fBornðkf;kiÞ¼/C0m
2ph/kfj^Vj/kii: (3)
Since the Born amplitude in the case of an isotropic interac-
tion VðjrjÞ, such as the familiar Coulomb or Newtonian
potential, is simply a real number, it does not manifest gen-
eral properties such as the optical theorem and analytic
behavior that are required of the full scattering amplitude.
However, by making a modiﬁcation to the plane wavepicture—the eikonal approximation—one can generate an
improved scattering amplitude that does satisfy some of the
desired properties. Here, “eikonal” is the German form of
the Greek word /C15ijxv, meaning likeness or image. Although
well-known and studied in the research literature,2the eiko-
nal technique is not generally discussed in the standard quan-
tum mechanics texts. Exceptions are those by Schiff,3by
Landau and Lifshitz,4and by Sakurai and Napolitano,5but
even here, although the method is presented, applications are
generally thin. The purpose of this article is to provide a fewsuch applications.
In Sec. 