INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| AUGUST 01 2022
Quantitative measurement of birefringence in transparent
films across the visible spectrum 
Aaron D. Slepkov  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 625–634 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0087798
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Complementary cellophane optic gate and its use for a 3D iPad without glasses
Rev. Sci. Instrum.  (April 2012)
Cellophane as a half-wave plate and its use for converting a laptop computer screen into a three-
dimensional display
Rev Sci Instrum  (July 2003)
Microbial degradation of polymer solids: Ef fect of pretreatments on degradability of cellophane
Journal of Applied Physics  (October 2003) 04 October 2023 23:14:39
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
Quantitative measurement of birefringence in transparent films across
the visible spectrum
Aaron D. Slepkova)
Physics and Astronomy, Trent University, Peterborough K9L 0G2, Canada
(Received 9 February 2022; accepted 26 April 2022)
Common transparent polymer ﬁlms, such as cellophane and household tape, are frequently used as
examples of birefringent materials in textbooks and classroom demonstrations. Qualitatively,
birefringence is often demonstrated by layering such ﬁlms between crossed-polarizers. In thiswork, we describe an inexpensive experimental setup for the quantitative measurement of
birefringence in common household ﬁlms, suitable for senior high school or undergraduate labs.
Whereas traditional approaches for polarization-based classroom experiments typically usemonochromatic laser light, we encourage the combined use of an incoherent incandescent light
source and a portable spectrometer. In addition, we demonstrate how any concomitant thin-ﬁlm
interference effects can be used to separately measure the optical thickness in the most
heterogeneous and uniform ﬁlms. Such measurement can then be used as an independent
experimental conﬁrmation of either the ﬁlm’s index of refraction or its thickness, given knowledge
of the other. In an effort to provide examples for the data analysis procedures as well as toinvestigate a range of materials, we measure the birefringence across the visible spectrum of six
common household polymer ﬁlms, including thin kitchen wrap, cellophane, gift basket ﬁlm, and
common adhesive tapes.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0087798
I. INTRODUCTION
Optical birefringence is a material property pertaining to a
difference in index of refraction that depends on the polariza-tion and propagation direction of light. It is an importanttopic of study in optics, as birefringence is the central phe-nomenon used for many important technological applicationssuch as LCD screen displays,
1modern 3D glasses,2and
microscopy.3For centuries, calcite has remained the quintes-
sential example of a birefringent material.4As such, the
canonical demonstration of birefringence continues to be the
display of double-refraction in calcite; largely not onlybecause its birefringence is so large but also because theobservation of double-refraction does not require any prepa-ration of the polarization state of the light. However, whilebirefringence is at the heart of double-refraction,
4the latter
is a challenging concept to describe, and its demonstrationcan be lacklustre. Beyond calcite, birefringence in polymersand other “plastics” has also become a mainstay textbookexample of birefringence. In particular, the fact that house-hold ﬁlms, such as kitchen wrap and adhesive tape, can actas retarders (or waveplates ) remains a common feature in
polarization chapters of optics textbooks.
5Beyond theenticing visual effects of viewing bright tape between
crossed polarizers,6the mathematical and quantitative details
of such birefringence are also important and easily accessiblevia simple modern lab equipment.7
Over the years, there have been numerous investigations
of birefringence in transparent polymer ﬁlms.7–17Most of
these investigations measure the mean index of refraction n
or the maximum difference in index between perpendicularpolarizations (i.e., the birefringence Dn) at single or discrete
wavelengths,8–10 ,15–17where the wavelengths are often cho-
sen by the availability of laser sources.7In fact, both
detailed quantitative measurements and classroom labora-tory demonstrations of polarization-dependent optical phe-nomena typically involve narrowband (or monochromatic )
sources.
7,10,17–19 ,26It is difﬁcult to discern whether the ubiq-
uity of using lasers for lab demonstrations is pedagogicallydriven by a desire to keep measurements conceptuallyrestricted to single wavelengths, or simply by a presumption
that a coherent light source is needed. Nonetheless, there
may be broader pedagogical advantages to conducting con-ceptually simple but technologically sophisticated labexperiments involving broadband (i.e., “white”) and inco-herent light; experiments much like those used historically
625 Am. J. Phys. 90(8), August 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 625 04 October 2023 23:14:39
by the likes of Newton, Bernoulli, Brewster, Young, Biot,
Rayleigh, and others.
In this Letter, we describe a straightforward approach to
quantify the birefringence of transparent tape and other(quasi-)uniaxial transparent ﬁlms across the visible spec-trum. With a simple setup that includes cheap sheet polar-izers, standard lab optics, a portable USB spectrometer, andan incandescent light source, this experiment is ideal for
junior-level university/college instructional labs and ambi-
tious senior high school physics classrooms. Throughout thisarticle, we will highlight a variety of tricks and traps, knowl-edge of which may improve the quality of experimentalclassroom results. Finally, we will present the quantitativemeasurements of broadband birefringence for a variety ofcommon birefringent polymer ﬁlms, including adhesivetapes, gift-basket wrap, cellophane, and polyethylene kitchenwrap.
