IL 01 2022
Marinated eggs: An engaging quantitative demonstration of
diffusion 
Carson Emeigh ; Hyeonggeun (Luke) Bak ; Dilziba Kizghin ; Haipeng Zhang ; Sangjin Ryu  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 317–320 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0062178
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
The implementation of lean manufacturing to reduce waste at Pt. Charoen Pokphand Jaya Farm 3
Pekanbaru
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2023)
An Automatic T ool for Opening Embryonated Eggs
Rev Sci Instrum  (December 2004)
Effect of egg shell color on some egg quality in table eggs during storage at refrigerator temperature
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2016) 04 October 2023 23:07:30
NOTES AND DISCUSSION
Marinated eggs: An engaging quantitative demonstration of diffusion
Carson Emeigh
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
Hyeonggeun (Luke) Bak
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
Dilziba Kizghin
Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
Haipeng Zhang
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
Sangjin Ryua)
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
and Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
(Received 2 July 2021; accepted 20 February 2022)
Marinated or pickled eggs are enjoyed in cultures across the world, and recipes for these eggs use
diffusion to saturate the egg white of a hard-boiled egg with sauce. Inspired by the marinated egg,
this experiment demonstrates diffusion in an easy and quantitative way. Peeled hard-boiled eggs
are placed in a dye solution, and the penetration distance of the dye into the egg white is measuredas a function of time using image processing. The penetration distances are consistent with the
expected dependence on the square root of time, and the diffusion of the dye occurs faster at higher
temperatures as expected. This experiment provides a new way to demonstrate diffusion-basedmass transfer visually and to make a connection between physics and culture.
#2022 Published under
an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0062178
I. INTRODUCTION
Cooking involves diverse aspects of science, and different
cultures often have similar food recipes relying on the samescientiﬁc principle. For example, Korean soy sauce braised
eggs (GyeRan JangJoRim) are prepared by simmering hard-
boiled eggs in a soy-sauce-based marinade for a short periodof time. Similarly, recipes for Japanese Ramen eggs (Aji
Tamago) marinate hard-boiled eggs in a similar sauce for
hours in a refrigerator. Western pickled eggs and Chinesesalted eggs are also similar. The common physical principle
of these marinated eggs from different cultures is that their
cooking recipes rely on diffusion of sauces through eggwhites.
1
Diffusion is an important mass transfer mechanism by
which a substance is transported from a region of high con-
centration to a region of low concentration as a result of ran-dom molecular motion driven by thermal energy.2Molecules
move randomly (i.e., Brownian motion) driven by their ther-
mal energy in a medium of identical molecules.3This phe-
nomenon called self-diffusion occurs even without anyconcentration gradients. When there is a concentration gradi-
ent of the molecules, the random motion of each individual
molecule results in a directed ﬂux in the direction of the con-centration gradient. In this chemical or transport diffusion,
the concentration distribution of the diffusing substance
through an isotropic medium is described by Fick’s secondlaw of diffusion: @C/@t¼Dr
2C. Here, Cis concentration, tis time, and Dis the diffusion coefﬁcient. For diffusion into
a semi-inﬁnite medium, the following square-root relation-ship is valid if the initial concentration is zero and the sur-face concentration remains constant: the distance of
penetration dis proportional to the square root of time and
the diffusion coefﬁcient: d/(Dt)
1/2.A s Dincreases with
temperature, dincreases with temperature.
A simple demonstration of diffusion is to release an odor
in air, or a drop of dye in stationary water, and then to mea-sure the traveling distance of the odor or dye over time by
students’ noses or eyes.4The diffusion coefﬁcient of the dif-
fusing substance can be estimated by plotting the measureddistances vs time and then curve ﬁtting the plot. These dem-onstrations illustrate the phenomenon of diffusion, but it ischallenging to measure the traveling distance of odor or dye
accurately, eliminating the effect of advection on the trans-
port of odor or dye, and to show the effect of temperature ondiffusion.
We have developed a new demonstration of diffusion using
peeled hard-boiled eggs and food dye, inspired by the afore-mentioned cooking methods for marinated eggs. The eggs sit
in the dye solution for predetermined time intervals, and a sin-
gle egg is taken out at different time points. The egg is slicedin half and then the cross-section is imaged. From the images,the penetration distance of the dye into the egg white is mea-sured by image processing. Then, the square-root relationship
(d/t
1/2) is conﬁrmed by ﬁtting it to the obtained data. The
experiment is then repeated at different temperatures to dem-onstrate the effect of ambient temperature on diffusion.
317 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 317 04 October 2023 23:07:30
