Ibon Alonso ; Ane Gondra ; Nerea Gondra
Am. J. Phys.  90, 652 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0061884
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Basic literacy and numerical skills through using puzzle media in early childhood
AIP Conf. Proc.  (September 2023)
The ef fect of mathematics games to the student perception of mathematics subject: A case study in
Sekolah Kebangsaan Bukit Kuda, Klang
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2013) 04 October 2023 23:15:39
Calculation and measurement of center of mass: An all-in-one activity
using Tangram puzzles
Jose M. Campillo-Robles,a)Ibon Alonso,b)Ane Gondra,c)and Nerea Gondrad)
Zientzia eta Teknologia Fakultatea, UPV/EHU, Sarriena auzoa z/g, 48940, Leioa, Basque Country, Spain
(Received 30 June 2021; accepted 24 June 2022)
We present a simple, low-cost activity for students in a university-level introductory physics
course. The main objective of the activity is to calculate and experimentally measure the center ofmass of a 2D Tangram ﬁgure using complementary techniques. First, the algebraic and numerical
results for the center of mass of the Tangram pieces are checked analytically and using
mathematical software. Students then create their own Tangram ﬁgure and calculate its center ofmass using formulas from physics tables. CAD software is also used to obtain the ﬁgure’s center of
mass. Finally, the center of mass is measured experimentally, and a comparison with the
theoretical results is made. The modularity of the activity allows instructors’ ﬂexibility to design anad hoc activity to emphasize individual subjects according to the needs of their course.
#2022
Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0061884
I. INTRODUCTION
First introduced by the Greek scientist Archimedes of
Syracuse,1the ancient concept of the center of gravity origi-
nated directly from physics. Nevertheless, the center of grav-
ity has applications in many other disciplines, includingengineering, mathematics, physiology, statistics, military sci-ences, and philosophy. In physics, the center of gravity is
closely related to other two important concepts: the center of
mass
2,3and the centroid. In fact, those three concepts are
used almost interchangeably, principally in introductory uni-versity physics (see the Appendix for equivalence condi-
tions).
4–6Since the gravitational ﬁeld can be considered to
be uniform for most of the systems analyzed in introductoryphysics, and the centroid is a purely mathematical deﬁnition,we will focus on the center of mass throughout the paper.
The accurate calculation of the position of the center of
mass is an essential task in static structure design (buildings,
bridges, etc.) in the manufacturing of many devices (such asrobots and vehicles) or even when considering motion of thehuman body.
7,8For example, aligning the direction of thrust
of a rocket motor so that it pushes exactly through the rock-
et’s center of mass is necessary to achieve a straight ﬂight.9
In introductory physics courses, calculations and measure-
ments of the position of the center of mass are often limitedto a few of the simplest cases. In lectures, the centers of
mass of simple 2D and 3D bodies are usually calculated
using tables. In the physics laboratory, two activities that arecommonly employed are hanging of simple 2D geometricﬁgures and oscillating/balancing toys (roly-poly toy, balanc-
ing bird, etc.).
10,11Qualitative demonstrations performed
with toys are probably insufﬁcient to illuminate all aspectsof the topic, as they usually ignore the necessary detailedcalculations.
In this paper, we propose a versa tile and economical activity,
which makes use of tools that ﬁrst-year students can handle, to
calculate and measure centers of mass. This activity aims tointegrate theory with experiment, connecting equations, andmeasurements. In Sec. 