Interested In
Filtering Action of a Blanket Dome
J Acoust Soc Am  (July 2005)
Performance of a blanket in the presence of flow
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005)
Thermal Control T echnology Developments for a V enus Lander
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2010) 04 October 2023 22:56:54
Effects of greenhouse gases on Earth, Venus, and Mars: Beyond
the one-blanket modela)
Philip C. Nelsonb)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104
(Received 12 September 2022; accepted 27 March 2023)
I present a discussion of the effect of increasing carbon dioxide on planetary climate, at a level
suitable for insertion as a module into an upper-level Physics course. The treatment includes twokey ingredients that are often missing from more elementary discussions, yet are amenable to
analytic methods: First, that convection implies a dependence of surface temperature on the height
of the outermost infrared-thick layer; and second, that increasing the level of CO
2closes spectral
windows of absorption. These themes are applicable not only to an industrializing Earth but also to
our neighboring planets. #2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0125523
I. INTRODUCTION
Many Physics students have been exposed to models of
the warming inﬂuence of increasing CO 2, but often via a
very simple “one-blanket” model. Although that is a goodstart, students may then be left wondering
•‘‘The most abundant green house gas by far is H
2O;
and we have no control over it ;so how can reducing
CO 2emission be relevant ?}
•‘‘In the CO 2absorption bands the atmosphere
is already completely opaque ;and you can0t exceed
100% absorption ;
so how can adding more hurt ?} (1)
Every citizen needs some crisp, qualitative answers to
these questions. One sometimes gets the impression that tooffer convincing replies requires considerable formalmachinery, including solution of the Schwarzschild equationof radiative transport. Indeed, some textbook discussionsjump directly from a highly simpliﬁed model to the conclu-sions of state-of-the-art general circulation models, whichstudents must then take on faith.
This article will attempt to bridge the gap in a way that
can be inserted as a short module into a standard existing
course such as “modern” physics (or indeed nearly any
upper-level course); or in specialized courses on the physicsof energy or environment.
1Even students who will later pur-
sue detailed analysis can beneﬁt from exploring models thatare simple enough to expose mechanisms, and they may ﬁnd
the graphical reasoning here to be a useful guidepost (anduseful when discussing with non-physicists). Students willalso recognize that similar considerations also apply toexoplanets.
2
The main points to be made here are available in more
technical publications, for example, Ref. 3; the goal of the
present article is to present them in a brief format. Featuresthat are unusual for treatments at this level include discus-sion of the role of convection via graphical arguments (anddimensional analysis), as well as some observational datathat are not usually shown. I also discuss how to avert poten-tial confusion by spotlighting the simple mathematical factthathg/C14fi6¼gðhfiÞifgis a nonlinear function (Sec. VB,
presented graphically in Fig. 7and applied in Fig. 8).Finally, Sec. Vaddresses the motivating questions (1) above
with a discussion of complex molecular spectra, leading up
to a semiquantitative exercise for students. Many other
important topics are omitted for brevity, including detailed
radiative transport, full 3D modeling, the effects of oceans,
cloud feedback, and so on. Interested readers will ﬁnd some
of these omissions rectiﬁed in intermediate-level books
4–9
and articles10–15and references therein.
Suggested answers to queries (1) above appear in the
Conclusion.
