Interested In
Ill-posedness in the Einstein equations
J. Math. Phys.  (August 2000)
Introducing Ill ‐ Structured Problems in Introductory Physics Recitations
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2007)
Well ‐  and ill ‐ considered numerical solution constructions
J Acoust Soc Am  (April 2005) 04 October 2023 22:53:35
Analysis of ill-conditioned cases of a mass moving on a sphere
with friction
Terry W. McDaniela)
Model Physics, Tucson, Arizona 85716
(Received 17 July 2021; accepted 23 April 2023)
Previous work treated the problem of a mass sliding over a rough spherical surface in broad
generality, providing both analytic and numerical solutions. This paper examines special cases of2D motion along a surface meridian when the initial speed is precisely chosen so that the sliding
mass nearly stops before speeding up and subsequently leaving the surface. Carrying the solution
for these critical cases into the time domain via both an analytical method and numericalintegration adds richness that might otherwise be missed. The numerical method raises practical
mathematical issues that must be handled carefully to obtain accurate results. Although
conceptually simple, this classical mechanics problem is an excellent vehicle for students to gainproﬁciency with mathematical analysis tools and further their appreciation for how applied
mathematics can bring new insight into situations where intuition may fall short.
#2023 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0063834
I. INTRODUCTION
The motion of a mass msliding on a spherical surface
under the inﬂuence of gravity addresses many concepts inelementary classical mechanics and yet offers surpriseseven for experienced physicists. In the absence of friction,
this problem is accessible to beginning students and
appears in many introductory mechanics texts (see Refs. 1and 2 of Ref. 3). However, when friction is present,
1–6an
unexpected richness in the motion arises that may be hid-
den in a cursory analysis. A close examination of the widerange of possible behaviors can be carried out within aNewtonian framework using mathematics and a numerical
analysis that are familiar to undergraduate physics
students.
In Ref. 2, Mungan treated 2D motion along a meridian,
deriving the speed vhðÞof the sliding mass as a function of
polar angle hand also identifying the condition for the mass
to remain in contact with the spherical surface: v
2/C20rgcosh,
where ris the radius of the surface and gis the gravitational
acceleration. In Ref. 1, the author extended this work by
allowing azimuthal motion on the surface and by describingthe motion in the time domain. The present paper focuses ona fascinating feature of the 2D motion—the “notch” in vhðÞ
where the mass nearly comes to a complete stop before
speeding up again, leading to a wide plateau in the behaviorofh(t). We also extend the friction coefﬁcient range to [1,
100].
In the general case, the availability of analytic solutions
forvhðÞis somewhat limited (as Ref. 2nicely illustrates),
and we are forced to turn to numerical solutions. This allows
us to explore the motion over the full range of variables
h;tðÞ , initial energy, and coefﬁcient of friction l, without
limitation. Thus, the problem presents a conceptually simpleenvironment for application of the mathematical tool set that
undergraduates need to master: calculus, differential equa-
tions, and numerical techniques.
We begin by making a close examination of the non-linear
function vhðÞ;for cases exhibiting the notch behavior, over awide range of l. In Sec. 