Interested In
Physics Exams that Promote Collaborative Learning
Phys. T each.  (January 2014)
How accurately can students estimate their performance on an exam and how does this relate to their
actual performance on the exam?
AIP Conference Proceedings  (February 2012)
Smart exam monitoring system
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2021) 04 October 2023 23:13:57
Exam problems that link physical concepts with electrical phenomena
in living cells
Vadim Shlyonsky,a)Bertrand de Prelle, Florian Bodranghien, Don Patrick Bischop,
and David Gall
Laboratoire d’Enseignement de la Physique, Facult /C19ed eM /C19edecine, Universit /C19e libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles,
Belgium
(Received 14 October 2021; accepted 2 May 2022)
We present a collection of biophysics examination problems that focus on electrodiffusion, the
superposition principle, and currents in RC circuits, leading towards an understanding of the
Hodgkin–Huxley model of action potentials. These problems link basic concepts in electricity tothe physiology of living cells. The models described in these problems are intended help students
develop an understanding of electrical processes in cells. Our work shows how introductory-level
electricity courses can be taught in parallel with basic cell (electro)physiology and how basicconcepts of electric circuits apply to cellular phenomena.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0075228
I. INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we present a selection of examination prob-
lems that were used in a course on biophysics taught formore than a decade to undergraduate students at the Faculty
of Medicine of the Universit /C19e libre de Bruxelles. This course
covers the physical/electrical principles underlying restingmembrane phenomena and membrane excitation in livingcells. It is taken by second-year premedical and biomedicalscience students who have already studied both introductory
physics and calculus for one year, and a similar course could
be appropriate for biomedical engineering students. Theproblems help to illustrate the concepts that we present inthis course. They may be of interest not only to instructors ofsimilar courses but also to instructors in more standard phys-
ics courses who wish to include problems with biological
relevance.
It should be noted that there is no particular textbook that
covers exactly all of the topics of the course; a speciﬁc text-book has been written for our students (in French) and is freelyavailable upon request. The problems selected for this paperare arranged to follow the course syllabus. We begin with elec-
trostatics and electrodiffusion and then advance to increasingly
complex equivalent electrical circuits of biological membraneswhile progressively summarizing physiologically relevantelectrical phenomena and concepts. The ﬁnal aim of the courseis to present the Hodgkin–Huxley model of cell excitability.
This is a mathematical model in which cellular electrical phe-
nomena are represented by a set of three nonlinear differentialequations whose time-dependent solutions explain how electri-cal signals (i.e., action potentials) are generated in neurons.
The structure and complexity of these problems are
conﬁgured to make the ﬁnal examination a “learning by syn-
thesis” according to Bloom’s taxonomy.
1During the semes-
ter, problems of similar complexity are assigned to studentsas open-book homework. Students are taught to drawsketches of problems or to complete already available onesto facilitate understanding. They can also meet instructors
for additional guidance.
The overall goal of this type of learning is to show students
that simple equivalent electrical circuits and basic knowledgeof their functioning provide a foundation for modeling thenatural processes governing resting and excitable cellmembrane behavior. The term “excitable cell” describes a liv-
ing cell whose plasma membrane contains voltage-dependent
ion channels responsible for ﬁring action potentials beyond a
certain threshold membrane voltage value. As in any science,
biophysical models are designed to match observations in thelimits ﬁxed by measuring instruments. To reinforce this, we
offer learning-objective based comments on each problem in
order to link its model with actually measured examples of cel-
lular electrical phenomena or with experimental approaches
routinely employed in electrophysiology. To this end, many
problems have been modiﬁed by introducing conceptual ques-
tions requiring answers in everyday language. These questionsmay be given as homework, but they are omitted on written
examinations due to time limitations. The models for these
exam questions are created to be as simple as possible (with
the least number of components) while mimicking a broad
range of natural phenomena. In other words, they are based on
ideal conditions and their equivalent circuits but do not contain
details of real voltage/current clamp experiments such as thosethat lead to the artefacts related to Ag/AgCl-electrode poten-
tials, liquid-junction potentials, or series resistance compensa-
tion, all of which are common issues in electrophysiology but
not essential in our biophysics course. (Here, “Clamp” means
that whole circuit is held at either a ﬁxed voltage or ﬁxed totalcurrent.) Consequently, these problems are not suitable for a
pure electrophysiology class.
We hope that by becoming familiar with formulating cell
behavior via simple electrical models, students will develop
insights, which will be useful for future applications of bio-
physics in medicine, biology, and biomedical technology. In
our opinion, this is an original approach in life-sciences curric-
ula as introductory physics and physiology are rarely taughttogether. This collection has been screened against available
didactic literature on the same topic, and only original exam-
ples are included.
2–9Less-relevant problems or problems of
lower difﬁculty can be found in many excellent textbooks with
end-of-chapter tutorial questions.10–23During examinations,
students are given the following list of physical constants :
k¼1/(4pe0)¼9.0/C2109Nm2C/C02,l0¼4p/C210/C07Tm A/C01,
R¼8.314 J mol/C01K/C01,F¼96 500 C mol/C01,mproton ¼1.6726
/C210/C027kg,qproton ¼þ 1.601 /C210/C019C, and NA¼6.022
/C21023. These symbols will be used without deﬁnition in the
587 Am. J. Phys. 90(8), August 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 587 04 October 2023 23:13:57
problems below. Full analytic solutions of the problems can be
found in the supplementary material.27
