Interested In
Sacramento Peak Solar T elescope
Physics T oday  (January 1964)
Ninety never sounded so good: Guiding an historical auditorium into the 21st century
J Acoust Soc Am  (October 2017)
Solar telescope
Physics T oday  (May 1966) 04 October 2023 22:54:21
AWARDS
2023 AAPT award citations at the summer meeting in Sacramento, California
Jeffrey Bennett—2023 Klopsteg Memorial Lecture
Award
Jeffrey Bennett, astronomer,
teacher, and writer, is the
2023 recipient of theKlopsteg Memorial LectureAward. This award recog-nizes educators who havemade notable and creativecontributions to the teachingof physics.
Regarding his selection to
receive the 2023 Klopsteg
Award Bennett said, “I’m
very honored to r eceive this
award, especially since it comes from the AmericanAssociation of Physics Teachers, which represents a groupof outstanding educators who share my passion for usingphysics—and science in general—to help us create a better andmore just world for everyone.”
Bennett received a B.A. in Biophysics from the University
of California at San Diego and an M.S. and Ph.D. inAstrophysics from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Specializing in mathematics and science education, he writes
for and speaks to audiences ranging from elementary schoolchildren to university faculty.
For more than 30 years, Bennett has successfully advanced
the cause of public understanding of physics. Key achieve-ments include:
•Serving as the ﬁrst “Visiting Senior Scientist” at NASA
Headquarters whose focus was speciﬁcally on education
and outreach. In this role, he launched a transformative
effort at NASA that vastly expanded public outreach byscientists engaged in astrophysics missions and research.
•Creating the concept for a new and innovative type of
scale model solar system exhibit, ﬁrst at the University of
Colorado and then with the Voyage scale model solar sys-tem (for which he served as co-PI), the ﬁrst permanentinstallation on the U.S. National Mall in Washington, DC
to be focused speciﬁcally on science education. The
Voyage model depicts the Sun, the planets, and the distan-ces between them on a scale of one to ten billion, provid-
ing visitors an accurate sense of the vastness of our solar
system, a unique perspective on the beauty and fragility ofour home planet, and the inspirational message embodiedin the fact that our species has managed to learn so much
about other worlds. Dr. Bennett continues to work with
the Voyage National Program (voyagesolarsystem.org) tospread Voyage “Mark 