Introducing quantum mechanics through its historical roots:
The hydrogen Rydberg atom viewed through the lens of the
old quantum theory
M. G. Littman ; E. Gordis ; P. Zhelnin ; J. Arnold
Am. J. Phys.  91, 371 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0094860
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A mechanical analog of Bohr ’s atom based on de Broglie’ s double-solution approach
Chaos  (October 2021)
The principle of relativity and the de Broglie relation
American Journal of Physics  (June 2016)
A classical analog of the quantum Zeeman ef fect
Chaos  (March 2022) 04 October 2023 22:52:10
Introducing quantum mechanics through its historical roots:
The hydrogen Rydberg atom viewed through the lensof the old quantum theory
M. G. Littman,a)E.Gordis,b)P.Zhelnin,c)and J. Arnoldd)
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544
(Received 6 April 2022; accepted 25 February 2023)
Solutions of Schr €odinger’s equation for Rydberg states of hydrogen are shown to display patterns
that can be understood semi-classically within the framework of Bohr-Sommerfeld planetary orbits
and de Broglie’s concept of matter waves. Using n¼10 and n¼100 quantum levels we show how
de Broglie-wave-analyzed Kepler orbits can be matched to excited-state wavefunctions and charge
distributions. Making the connection between the old and new quantum theories can help
beginning students develop an intuition about quantum mechanics and allow them to develop anappreciation of how Schr €odinger’s wave mechanics was stimulated by the theories of his
predecessors.
VC2023 Author(s) .All article content, except where otherwise noted, is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0094860
I. CIRCULAR ORBITS AND “CIRCULAR STATES”
Niels Bohr’s 1913 paper described an analytical method
that built upon Ernest Rutherford’s concept of an atom as a
positively charged nucleus surrounded by a system of nega-
tively charged electrons.1An early success of Bohr’s atomic
theory was its ability to derive and explain the empirical for-mula of Johannes Rydberg for the frequencies of spectral
lines of atomic hydrogen.2Bohr analyzed the hydrogen atom
as a single electron orbiting an inﬁnitely massive positivenucleus (that is, a single proton). He simpliﬁed the problem
by assuming further that the electron orbit was circular. Bohr
used non-relativistic classical mechanics as the foundationfor his analysis, but he also drew upon the work of Max
Planck to understand radiation associated with an orbiting
electron. Planck earlier had proposed the concept of theenergy-quanta to explain blackbody radiation.
3In Bohr’s
model, rather than an orbiting electron radiating energy con-
tinuously, he suggested that radiation from excited hydrogen
occurred in distinctly separated emissions (described today
as jumps) between stationary states. Stationary states ofhydrogen were those that satisﬁed an integer condition con-
nected with Planck’s idea of quantized action.
Bohr designated the integer factor in his analysis with s—
we will instead use n, which is known commonly as the prin-
cipal quantum number. Bohr showed that the energy of the
stationary states is proportional to /C01=n
2, and the angular
momentum of the stationary states is nh=2p, where his
Planck’s constant. Bohr identiﬁed a most tightly bound state
(the ground state) corresponding to the smallest possible pos-
itive integer, n¼1. The radius of the circular orbits accord-
ing to Bohr’s model is n2a0, where a0is the Bohr radius. The
model also shows that the electron velocity in an orbit is
v=c¼ð1=nÞð2pe2=ð4pe0hcÞÞ. (Here, e0is the permittivity of
free space.4) The numerical factor in the velocity relation-
ship is Sommerfeld’s ﬁne structure constant, a¼2pe2=
ð4pe0hcÞ/C251=137. The velocity scales as 1 =n. The energy of
stationary states of the electron according to the Bohr model
is/C0ðhc R 1Þ=n2, where R1is the Rydberg constant and cis
the speed of light. Bohr’s derived formulas for both a0and
R1were given in terms of fundamental constants: the elec-
tron mass, m0; the electron charge, e; and Planck’s constant,h. Bohr’s value for R1based on fundamental constants is
very close to Rydberg’s experimentally determined value.
The notion of a moving electron as a wave is often invoked
in modern explanations of Bohr’s quantum theory, but the
concept did not emerge until about 10 years after Bohr’s land-
mark paper. Bohr only introduced a stability condition. Louis
de Broglie, drawing on the works of Maupertuis (principle ofleast action) and Fermat (principle of least time), reasoned
that particles following a trajectory have a wave nature. In a
paper published in 1925, de Broglie noted the connection
between the concept of a particle wave and Bohr’s stability
condition:5“Propagation is, therefore, analogue to a liquid
wave in a channel closed on itself but of variable depth. It is
physically obvious, that to have a stable regime, the length ofthe channel must be resonant with the wave; …The resonance
condition is L¼nkif the wavelength is constant …” [ Lis de
Broglie’s value for the length of the channel and nis an inte-
ger.] Then he continued in a later paragraph, “In the particular
case of closed circular Bohr orbits in an atom, one gets:
m
0ÞvdL¼2pRm 0v¼nh,w h e r e v¼Rx,w h e n xis angular
velocity, m0xR2¼nh=2p. This is exactly Bohr’s fundamen-
tal formula.” Since the circumference of the Bohr circle is
2pR, the wavelength extracted from Bohr’s formula is
k¼h=m0v, that is, de Broglie’s well known relationship. We
see that the circular Bohr orbit contains nelectron wave-
lengths, and the electron phase is a multiple of 2 patnpoints
equally spaced along the orbit.
Now we consider the Schr €odinger wavefunction, which in
a spherical basis ðr;h;uÞis characterized by the quantum
numbers, n;‘,a n d m. We will focus on the “circular state”6of
quantum level n, which has maximal values of both ‘andm,
namely, ‘¼n/C01a n d m¼6‘. Since we compare orbits to a
slice of the wavefunction, it is helpful ﬁrst to consider the big-
ger picture of what the electron charge distribution looks like
for the n¼10 “circular state.” This is given in Fig. 1, which
shows in 3D that the distribution appears as a torus centeredon the origin. The charge density peaks at a radius somewhere
between the inner and outer radii of the torus.
The sum of the squares of the real and the imaginary parts
of the wavefunction is used to compute the probability den-
sity in Fig. 1. Figure 2is a 2D contour plot of the real part of
the wavefunction in the x–yplane. Red contours are for
371 Am. J. Phys. 91(5), May 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp VCAuthor(s) 2023.
 371 04 October 2023 22:52:10
positive real values. Blue dashed contours are for negative
real values. Black lines indicate where the real part of thewavefunction is zero.
The imaginary part of the wavefunction in the x–yplane
has the same pattern as the real part shown in Fig. 2but isrotated about the z-axis by þ10
/C14(CCW) for the m¼þ9 state
and by /C010/C14(CW) for the m¼– 9 state. Because the n¼10
“circular state” has 9-fold symmetry, a spatial rotation of 40/C14
(that is, 360/C14=9) in either the CCW or CW direction about z
will leave the complex wavefunction unchanged. The 610/C14
relative rotation between real and imaginary parts means that
the azimuthal pattern of the real and imaginary parts oscillates
and is in quadrature (that is, one quarter of the way to the sym-metry rotation). This is fundamental.7It allows the sum of the
squares of real and imaginary parts to be constant as a function
of the azimuthal angle /. We are interested in using orbits to
understand spatial patterns in wavefunctions. Since the patternsof real and imaginary parts differ only by a rotation, we restrictour comparison, without loss of generality, to the real part of
the wavefunction. All subsequent mention of the wavefunc-
tion, therefore, will be the real part only.
We now compare Schr €odinger’s wavefunction for n¼10
“circular states” with Bohr’s circular orbit for n¼9a n d n¼10.
Why consider n¼9? We include the n¼9 orbit because
Schr €odinger and Bohr analyses differ in their values for angular
momentum. Schr €odinger’s value of angular momentum for
“circular states” of quantum level nisðn/C01Þh=2p, whereas
the circular orbits of Bohr for quantum level nhave angular
momentum nh=2p,t h a ti s , h=2plarger. The Bohr method over-
estimates angular momentum of each quantum level—thiswell-known ﬂaw of Bohr’s theory
8was corrected by
Schr €odinger in 1926.9This error leads Bohr to assume that the
angular momentum of the n¼1 ground state is h=2p, whereas
Schr €odinger’s ground state has angular momentum zero. So,
we will start by considering both n¼9a n d n¼10 Bohr orbits
in comparison with the n¼10 “circular state.” Plotted in Fig. 2
are contours of the Schr €odinger wavefunction in the x–yplane
as compared with these two Bohr orbits.
We see that while the n¼10 Bohr orbit does a good job at
matching the anti-node peaks of the real part of the wavefunc-tion, the red dots in that orbit miss the wavefunction phase
(that is, the oscillations)—whereas the red dots of the n¼9
Bohr orbit do a good job at matching the phase – they do thisbecause the angular momentum for the n¼9B o h rc a s e
matches the angular momentum (and the symmetry) of the
n¼10 circular Schr €odinger case. Our approach then for com-
paring Schr €odinger n¼10 results to the Bohr model is to use
then¼9 orbit but scaling it up in physical dimension by the
factor, 100/81. Now both the size of the orbit and the phase
will line up as shown in Fig. 4(a). For comparisons with states
of higher values of n,f o re x a m p l e , n¼100, as considered in
Sec. 