Interested In
Quantitative demonstration of Lenz’ s law
The Physics T eacher  (January 1998)
Another W ay to Demonstrate Lenz’ s Law
The Physics T eacher  (April 2002)
Computerized Physical Pendulum for Classroom Demonstrations
The Physics T eacher  (April 2005) 04 October 2023 22:54:34
An experimental demonstration of level attraction with coupled
pendulums
Chenyang Lu,a)Bentley Turner,b)Y ongsheng Gui,c)and Jacob Burgessd)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3T 2N2
Jiang Xiaoe)
Department of Physics and State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433,
China
Can-Ming Huf)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3T 2N2
(Received 10 December 2021; accepted 19 June 2023)
We have experimentally demonstrated dissipative coupling in a double pendulum system through
observation, which shows three distinctly different patterns of motion over the accessible
parameter space. The described dissipative coupling apparatus is easy to manufacture and budget-friendly. The theoretical calculations are also suitable for the undergraduate level. Our experiment
can serve as a novel demonstration for ubiquitous dynamic coupling effects encountered in many
disparate physical systems. Unlike the well-known spring-coupled pendulums, our experimentemploys Lenz’s effect to couple the pendulums through electromagnetic damping, which, to the
best of our knowledge, has not been demonstrated in the classroom. Our pendulums exhibit level
attraction behaviour between two modes, induced by the dissipative coupling. This stands incontrast to the traditionally taught concept of level repulsion (avoided crossing) with spring-
coupled pendulums. This experiment showcases distinctly different time domain dynamics of the
dissipatively coupled pendulums over the parameter space, characterized by different oscillationpatterns, damping rates, and relative phase between the two pendulums, which is a valuable lesson
elucidating the dynamics of synchronization in linear systems for undergraduate students.
#2023
Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0081906
I. INTRODUCTION
Laboratory demonstrations are considered essential in
high school, university, and graduate education. With the
modernization of demonstration equipment, both in terms offunctionality and complexity due to technological advance-
ments, conducting experimental demonstrations has become
easier than ever before. More importantly, the reduced costsof laboratory apparatus have made it more accessible to awider range of students from different backgrounds. It pro-
vides an environment that fosters research and professional
exploration and plays a role in the triggering and dissemi-nating of new ideas. Demonstrations of coupling effectsoffer some of the best material to immediately capture the
attention of students. Generally, coupling between oscilla-
tors can be classiﬁed into two broad categories. The tradi-tionally taught and demonstrated type is named coherentcoupling,
1–6where energy circulates between oscillators.
Coherent coupling is typically demonstrated by spring-
coupled cars or a spring-coupled pendulum system in thesmall angle approximation as shown in Fig. 1(a). The cou-
pling effect in these systems is dependent on the relative dis-
placement between the objects due to Hooke’s law. Under
this case, two oscillators tend to break their degeneracy andfeature eigenmode splitting in an avoided crossing (level
repulsion) as shown in Fig. 1(b).
2The distinct eigenmodes
of coherent coupled systems manifest as a beating oscilla-tion pattern in the time domain, as shown in Fig. 1(c).T h e
other coupling category is dissipative coupling;
6–10such
coupling is achieved by introducing energy dissipation
channels into the system. It is generally modeled as aviscous damper as shown in Fig. 1(d), in which the coupling
effect is proportional with the relative velocity of two
pendulums.11Dissipative coupled pendulums tend to re-
establish the system’s degeneracy, which causes itseigenmodes to coincide; it features level attraction as shownin Fig. 1(e). In the time domain, dissipative coupling leads
to rapid synchronization of oscillators, as shown in Fig. 1(f).
Notably, synchronization can also be achieved through non-linear effects in mutual coupled systems,
12–14which require
non-linear frequency pulling effects, but in this paper, we
focus on the linear effect.
Both coupling types can be observed in various physical
systems such as electric circuits,8advanced cavity-magnon-
polariton systems,6,7,9and laser systems.10Application
examples include stabilizing skyscrapers,15modeling Earth’s
nutation and precession,16quantum computing,4,17and even
musical instrument making.18Coherent coupled systems
have been well studied, but the detailed exploration of dissi-
pative coupling is still under development. Although the
majority of studies into dissipative coupling have focused onadvanced systems, this phenomenon has also been predicted
and modeled in purely classical systems.19Here, we experi-
mentally demonstrate a dissipative coupled pendulum sys-tem. In this demonstration, the dissipative coupling isachieved through electromagnetic damping. Due to the sys-
tem’s low frequency characteristic (Hz), the system’s time-
evolution can be directly observed. This experiment offers alovely opportunity for students to perform inquiry-driven
and open-ended investigation, as well as independent critical
thinking. It also provides students with the complete experi-ence of the process of scientiﬁc discovery.
585 Am. J. Phys. 91(8), August 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 585 04 October 2023 22:54:34
