Interested In
Modeling of Lateral Dynamics for an Endless Steel Belt
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2010)
Development of fatigue stress spectrum and fatigue life prediction of endless winder sheave for wind
turbine lift using finite element analysis
J. Renewable Sustainable Energy  (August 2014)
Experimental study on influence of filler rods in gas T ungsten Arc welding
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2019) 04 October 2023 22:52:57
Endless fun in high dimensions—A quantum card game
LeaKopfa)and Markus Hiekkam €akib)
Photonics Laboratory, Physics Unit, Tampere University, Tampere FI-33720, Finland
Shashi Prabhakarc)
Photonics Laboratory, Physics Unit, Tampere University, Tampere FI-33720, Finland and Quantum Science
and Technology Laboratory, Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad 380009, India
Robert Ficklerd)
Photonics Laboratory, Physics Unit, Tampere University, Tampere FI-33720, Finland
(Received 23 March 2022; accepted 12 April 2023)
Quantum technologies enable new ways to distribute and process information. The enormous
progress over the recent decades has led to an urgent need for new educational programs totrain professionals to work in this ﬁeld. Here, we present a card game that teaches students the
building blocks of quantum computing through strategic gameplay. Participants start from the
lowest quantum state and play cards that change their state and/or their opponents’ state,aiming to build an algorithm that achieves the highest possible quantum state. Players can
utilize several different strategies that rely on quantum features such as randomness,
superposition, interference, and entanglement. Our game expands on the existing QjCards i
game, originally developed using traditional qubits (with 2-level states), by including an option
to play with qutrits (with 3-level states), and by developing cooperative and single player
modes in addition to the existing competitive mode. The presented game contributes to theongoing efforts on gamifying quantum physics education with a particular focus on the
counter-intuitive features that make quantum computing powerful.
#2023 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0062128
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum physics is one of the most successful branches
of physics. At the very heart of quantum physics are princi-ples such as randomness, superposition, interference, andentanglement. These concepts are difﬁcult to grasp as theyoften contradict our intuition, which we developed throughexperiencing our large-scale, classical world. It is thesecounter-intuitive features that have enabled novel technolo-gies, which would not be possible in a classical setting. Thisemerging technological thrust is often termed the secondquantum revolution,
1since it differs signiﬁcantly on the fun-
damental and application level from the ﬁrst set of technolo-gies developed through applying quantum physics, e.g.,
lasers or semiconductor devices.
One of the most prominent examples of quantum technol-
ogy is a quantum computer. Compared to their classicalcounterparts, quantum computers promise a faster comple-tion of certain tasks and would enable computational algo-rithms that are impossible in a classical setting. Recentprogress has led to the ﬁrst large-scale quantum computerthat outperforms all classical computers for one speciﬁccomputational task.
2,3
In this article, we present a card game that provides a fun
and engaging introduction to the concepts of quantum com-puting. The game, Endless Fun in high dimensions ,i s
designed to be a low threshold introduction to quantum com-puting that encourages people to look into the fundamentals
of quantum physics. The game implements basic quantum
mechanical concepts such as randomness, superposition,interference, and entanglement. By playing cards that corre-spond to quantum logic operations, the participants aremanipulating the quantum state of a virtual quantum com-puter with the aim of achieving the highest value of theirown quantum state. The ﬁnal result is evaluated using an
included computer program. We note that although current
quantum computers work with two-level quantum states, this
card game goes a step further by also including the program-ming of three-dimensional quantum systems, i.e., high-
dimensional quantum system. Such higher dimensional
states, called qudits rather than qubits, are considered prom-ising candidates for next generation quantum computers and
other technologies.
4–6They are also beneﬁcial in the gaming
setting as they increase the complexity of the game playenabling longer lasting (maybe endless) fun.
