Interested In
Greenland glacier valley map reveals potential for increased melting
Investigation of the hepatic development in the coculture of hiPSCs-derived LSECs and HLCs in a fluidic
microenvironment
APL Bioeng.  (May 2021) 04 October 2023 23:08:22
Gravitational effects of ice sheets on sea level
Douglas A. Kurtzea)
Department of Physics, Saint Joseph’s University, 5600 City Avenue, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19131
(Received 20 August 2021; accepted 16 March 2022)
When ice melts from a large ice sheet and the melt water runs into the ocean, global-mean sea level
rises but, surprisingly, local sea level near the ice sheet may well drop. This is largely because theloss of mass reduces the gravitational pull of the ice sheet. We present a simple, analytically
tractable model to illustrate this effect. We look ﬁrst at a ﬂat earth with a circular continent
containing an ice sheet that is modeled as a point mass at its center and then extend the calculation
to a rigid spherical non-rotating earth. With a bit more mathematical sophistication, we then carry
out calculations for somewhat more realistic ice distributions and include the additional gravitationof the mass of displaced sea water. We give numerical results for the “ﬁngerprint” of sea level
change resulting from a 1000-Gt (10
15-kg) loss of ice on a rigid, non-rotating earth, with parameter
values appropriate to the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets. #2022 Published under an exclusive license
by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0067924
I. INTRODUCTION
In the present time of rapid climate change, much atten-
tion has been given to sea level rise driven by global warm-
ing. Two processes contribute to this rise: thermal expansionof sea water (the thermosteric1contribution) and melting of
land-based ice with the melt water ﬂowing into the ocean
(the manometric contribution). It is well known that com-
plete melting of the Greenland ice sheet would, by itself,raise global-mean sea level by 7.42 60.05 m,2while melting
of the entire Antarctic ice sheet would cause a rise of
57.960.9 m.3It is perhaps less well known that this rise
would not be uniform around the globe. Counterintuitively,melting ice from Greenland lowers sea level atthe
Greenland shore, while far from Greenland it raises local sea
level by more than average.
Prominent among the causes of this nonuniformity in
sea-level change—as was recognized and systematicallyinvestigated as early as the 1880s
4–6—is the change to the
gravitational ﬁeld of the ice sheet itself. A massive ice sheet
attracts sea water, raising a mound in sea level around the
land on which the ice rests. When ice melts from the sheetand the melt water ﬂows into the ocean, the addition of waterto the ocean raises global-mean sea level, but the removal of
ice mass weakens the gravity of the sheet, and so lowers the
mound. Depending on the geometry of the situation, the low-ering of the mound height may be greater than the rise inglobal-mean sea level; if so, local sea level near the ice sheet
drops. In this paper, we will look at some very simple models
of this effect and explore a few of the complications thatarise when we try to make the models a bit more realistic.
Rearranging mass on the earth’s surface, such as by melt-
ing ice from an ice sheet and returning the water to the
ocean, has two other effects that can be comparable to that
of the gravitational change. First, it changes the earth’s (ten-sor) moment of inertia. To keep the earth’s angular momen-tum constant, then, the magnitude and/or direction of its
angular velocity must change in response. Second, it changes
the pattern of mechanical loading on the earth’s crust.Locations that see an increase in loading will then sink elas-tically, while locations where the loading decreases will
rebound upward. These Gravitational, Rotational, and
Deformation effects on sea level are collectively referred toasGRD-induced relative sea level change . (“Relative” here
means relative to the sea ﬂoor.)
The sea surface, in equilibrium, would coincide with the
geoid , which is a particular surface of constant geopotential.
Geopotential is the sum of gravitational potential and an
effective centrifugal potential due to the earth’s rotation. Arearrangement of water mass directly changes its contribu-tion to the gravitational potential, and any resulting deforma-tion of the solid earth changes itscontribution to the
gravitational potential, while the rotational effect changes
the effective centrifugal potential. Thus, all three effects
interact by modifying the geoid, which results in further rear-rangement of sea water with its own attending gravitational,rotational, and deformation effect.
7
The effects of transferring mass between an ice sheet and
the ocean are proportional to the amount of mass transferred,as is the resulting change in global-mean sea level (called
thebarystatic sea-level change). Thus, it makes sense to talk
about the ocean-wide pattern of local sea-level change perunit mass transferred, which is called the barystatic-GRD ﬁn-
gerprint . Conventionally, the mass unit is taken to be 1000
Gt (10
15kg), which is commensurate with a few years’ mass
loss from Greenland (an average of 222 630 Gt/yr in
2013–2017)8or Antarctica (219 643 Gt/yr in 2012–2017).9
Melting 1000 Gt of ice adds 1000 km3of fresh water to the
ocean; dividing this by the area of Earth’s oceans, 3 :625
/C2108km2,10gives a global-mean sea-level rise of 2.76 mm,
so local sea-level changes are also likely to be on the order
of millimeters. In this paper, we will express the numerical
results of our simple models in terms of this ﬁngerprint,although we will restrict our attention to an earth that is rigidand non-rotating, and so automatically exclude rotationaland deformation effects.
GRD effects play a crucial role in glacial isostatic adjust-
ment, which is the ongoing response of the shape of the earth
to the melting of the Pleistocene glaciers from about 21 000
to about 8000 years ago. The elastic deformation of the crust,referred to above, is inevitably followed by a much slowerviscoelastic adjustment in the mantle below the crust, ontime scales of millennia. Thus, the earth’s response to the
melting of the glaciers is still in progress. A theory of glacial
isostatic adjustment requires a model of the viscoelasticproperties of the mantle; it also requires accurate modeling
351 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 351 04 October 2023 23:08:22
of the surface loading, including the distribution of both
land-based ice and sea water. The sea-water component ofthe loading is described by the sea level equation , which
expresses the local depth of sea water as the difference
between the levels of the sea surface and the sea ﬂoor.11
GRD effects must be properly accounted for to calculate the
changes to both, and the resulting changes to the sea-water
loading then feed back into the adjustment process.12For
details of the theory, see recent reviews by de Boer et al. ,13
Spada,14and Whitehouse.15Whitehouse, in particular, gives
an interesting historical overview of the subject.
Strong observational evidence for this picture comes from
measurements of the time-varying direction of the earth’saxis of rotation, which can be determined to a precision ofbetter than a millisecond of arc.
16The observed variation
includes a secular drift that can be attributed to glacial iso-
static adjustment, plus more rapid variations on a time scaleof several years. Much of this faster variation can beexplained quantitatively as the consequence of changes in
the distribution of water on the earth’s surface, including
melting from ice sheets. To carry out this calculation,changes in the distribution of water and ice on land are deter-mined using data from the Gravity Recovery and Climate
Experiment (GRACE) mission. Changes to the distribution
of water in the oceans, however, must be inferred—in a man-ner which must incorporate the gravitational changes due tothis redistribution in order to match the observed variation of
the pole.
While all these effects are important for the real earth, our
purpose here is to model the gravitational effect only, inways that may be accessible at an undergraduate level. Webegin, in Sec. 