INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| FEBRUARY 01 2023
Low-cost quadrature optical interferometer 
Tanner M. Melody ; Krishna H. Patel ; Peter K. Nguyen ; Christopher L. Smallwood
Am. J. Phys.  91, 132–141 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.01 10405
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Quadrature formulae for problems in mechanics
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 2012)
Quadrature Sampling of High ‐ Frequency W aveforms
J Acoust Soc Am  (July 2005)
Improvement of the accuracy for the Euler-Maclaurin quadrature formulas
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 2021) 04 October 2023 22:49:35
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
Low-cost quadrature optical interferometer
Tanner M. Melody, Krishna H. Patel, Peter K. Nguyen, and Christopher L. Smallwooda)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, San Jos /C19e State University, San Jose, California 95192
(Received 15 July 2022; accepted 25 October 2022)
We report on the construction and characterization of a low-cost Mach–Zehnder optical
interferometer in which quadrature signal detection is achieved by means of polarization control.The device incorporates a generic green laser pointer, home-built photodetectors, 3D-printed
optical mounts, a circular polarizer extracted from a pair of 3D movie glasses, and a
PYTHON -
enabled microcontroller for analog-to-digital data acquisition. Components ﬁt inside of a 1200/C2600
space and can be assembled on a budget of less than US$500. The device has the potential to make
quadrature interferometry accessible and affordable for instructors, students, and enthusiasts alike.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0110405
I. INTRODUCTION
Optical interference is a phenomenon in which overlap-
ping beams of light act, by means of the superposition princi-ple of electromagnetism, to modulate the energy density thatwould have otherwise been present in the constituent beamson their own. In turn, the effect results in striking patterns ofirradiance fringes—akin to the nodes and antinodes that canbe observed in the harmonic modes of a vibrating guitarstring—that both verify the wave nature of light and enableprecision measurements. Optical interferometers are devicesengineered to exploit this phenomenon, and due to (1), theconnection between interference fringes and the extremelyshort length scales associated with optical wavelengths(400–700 nm), (2) the abundance of high-quality manipula-tion and detection capabilities at these wavelengths, and (3)the invention of lasers, interferometers have long enjoyed wide-ranging relevance in science and technology. Applicationsinclude testing fundamental physics principles,
1,2measuring
velocities and positions,3–5characterizing material properties,6
and controlling and manipulating both classical and quantumlight sources.7–11Beyond this, optical interferometers enjoy a
prominent position in classroom physics laboratories, and sev-eral different supply companies are currently selling commer-cialized products and activities.
12–14
For the most part, interferometers are designed for delicate
measurements and/or repeated use, and so construction costscan be large, ranging from about $3,000 (for an educationalapparatus available from Thorlabs),
12all the way up to
$1.1 billion [for the laser interferometer gravitational-waveobservatory (LIGO)].15There is a certain utility, however, in
exploring the degree to which these instruments can behome-built and/or scaled down to minimal components and
cost.16–24Such devices expand the growing body of optics
capabilities enabled by the maker movement25–31and could, for
example, be assembled by hobbyists or produced at scale and
shipped out to students in large-enrollment online classes.
Here, we report on the construction of an optical interfer-
ometer that can be assembled on a budget of under $500 and
that exhibits both automated data acquisition and quadrature
detection capabilities. The interferometer utilizes a green
laser pointer, 3D-printed optical mounts, home-built photo-detectors, and microcontroller-based analog-to-digital signal
conversion. Among the unique aspects of the setup, differen-
tiating it from other low-cost interferometers that have been
reported to date, is the fact that quadrature signals are gener-
ated through polarization control with phase delays between
horizontal and vertical polarization components achieved
using a ﬁlter extracted from a pair of circularly polarized 3D
movie glasses. We benchmark interferometer performance
by using it to measure the thermal expansion coefﬁcient of
an aluminum plate on which the interferometer is mounted.
While the results reveal quantitative inaccuracies, qualitative
features are robust. We discuss possible sources of error and
areas for improvement.
The construction of the instrument described in this man-
uscript formed the basis of an independent research project
conducted by undergraduates and a master’s student in our
laboratory, and we found it to be an excellent means of
teaching students about the real-world applications ofinterferometers, quadrature detection, wave plates, Jones
matrices, circuitry, and experimental control protocols.
The device has the potential to be used in the same manner at
other institutions or could perhaps be manufactured at scale
132 Am. J. Phys. 91(2), February 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 132 04 October 2023 22:49:35
and utilized by students in larger and more structured class-
room settings.
