Interested In
Comparing catastrophes: The influence of impacts and timelines on prioritising crises
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023)
A Study on Evacuation Performance of Siphon ‐ Type W ater Closets
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2010)
Velocity measurement and flow field simulation of a sit-type water closet
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2012) 04 October 2023 22:53:26
Memories of a mid-20th century electrical measurements laboratory
and its instrumentation
Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr.a)
Department of Physics, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio 43022
(Received 23 April 2023; accepted 23 April 2023)
There was a time when undergraduate physics majors took a junior-level course in Electricity and
Magnetism, accompanied by a semester of laboratory work, learning to make precision electricalmeasurements. This laboratory experience is long gone, replaced by coursework in digital and
analog electronics. Even the latter has been downplayed in favor of a course in the use of digital
computers to solve problems in physics. In this article, I will discuss the course that I took as anundergraduate at Amherst College in the late 1950s and then taught as a young faculty member at
Kenyon College in the late sixties. I was a participant in the demise of the E&M laboratory and the
rise of the ensuing vacuum tube and digital electronics course. I will concentrate on the precisionapparatus, which is presently living out its life in the dusty back shelves of apparatus closets. This
may help new faculty members to answer the perennial question: It is attractive, but what is it and
how was it used?
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0155766
I. INTRODUCTION
I remember with great fondness the afternoons I spent in
the fall of 1957 as a student in the junior-year electrical mea-
surements laboratory, located in the beautiful red brick
Richardson Renaissance-Revival physics building at
Amherst College. I can still recall the ﬁerce joy of making
high-precision electrical measurements using—by today’sstandards—simple instruments, many of which were made in
the early years of the 20th century by the ﬁrms of Leeds &
Northrup of Philadelphia and General Radio of Cambridge,Massachusetts. Many of these instruments were still in use in
the mid-1960s, when I began my teaching career at Kenyon
College. While I never became a research physicist, eithertheoretician or experimentalist, I became an historian of
physics apparatus, and that has inspired me to collect, photo-
graph, and write about the wonderful mahogany and gleam-ing Vulcanite
TMblack boxes that we used in that laboratory.
In this article, I will describe that apparatus and the measure-
ments that were made with them.
In a world that has long since disappeared, my 1959 class
of about 300 men was part of the 1000 all-male student body
at Amherst. Of these, there were 17 physics majors, a fairly
large number at the time. One-sixth of us went on to medical
school and became physicians. An equal number went to law
school. A few of us went to graduate school in a wide varietyof disciplines. As far as I know, I was the only one in my
class to become a professor of physics at a liberal arts
college.
We came to the junior-year Electricity and Magnetism
course with a slender background in both physics and experi-
ment. As ﬁrst year students, we had taken the required
Science 1–2 course taught by Arnold Arons.
1Following that,
all science majors took a semester course in general physics
in the spring of our sophomore year. The Arons course had
relatively little laboratory work, whereas the sophomorecourse had a signiﬁcant lab component. Even then, we were
allowed in the lab only one day each week for just two hours,
so we had to arrive well-prepared and organized. It was atthis time that I learned to write laboratory reports and to
compose them on a typewriter!Here is the catalogue description of Physics 53, Electricity
and Magnetism, taught by Professor Theodore Soller in the
fall semester of our junior year: “Fundamentals of electrical
and magnetic measurements, and fundamental direct- and
alternating-current theory including bridge methods and cou-
pled circuits. Three hours of lecture and discussion and one
laboratory period per week. [The lab periods were at least
three hours in length.] A concurrent registration in theJunior-level Mechanics course is required.” In the spring
semester, we took the second half of the course, where we
learned about vector methods, potential theory, electrostat-
ics, induced emfs, Maxwell’s equations, electromagnetic
waves, and Poynting’s theorem; however, that course had no
laboratory component. My memory is that many of its gaps
were ﬁlled in by the concurrent Wave Phenomena course,
which had a splendid laboratory component, mostly in
optics.
