Interested In
The fastest capillary flow under gravity
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (June 2014)
Prediction and measurement of the fastest-growing mode in two-liquid systems
Physics of Fluids  (August 2019)
Extreme escape from a cusp: When does geometry matter for the fastest Brownian particles moving in
crowded cellular environments?
J. Chem. Phys.  (April 2020) 04 October 2023 22:57:45
Damped harmonic oscillator revisited: The fastest route to equilibrium
Karlo Lelasa)
Faculty of Textile Technology, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Nikola Poljakb)
Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Dario Jukic ´c)
Faculty of Civil Engineering, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
(Received 21 July 2022; accepted 6 July 2023)
Theoretically, solutions of the damped harmonic oscillator asymptotically approach equilibrium,
i.e., the zero energy state, without ever reaching it exactly, and the critically damped solution
approaches equilibrium faster than the underdamped or the overdamped solution. Experimentally,
the systems described with this model reach equilibrium when the system’s energy has droppedbelow some threshold corresponding to the energy resolution of the measuring apparatus. We show
that one can (almost) always ﬁnd an optimal underdamped solution that will reach this energy
threshold sooner than all other underdamped solutions, as well as the critically damped solution, nomatter how small this threshold is. We also comment on one exception to this for a particular type
of initial condition, when a speciﬁc overdamped solution reaches the equilibrium state sooner than
all other solutions. We experimentally conﬁrm some of our ﬁndings.
#2023 Published under an exclusive
license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0112573
I. INTRODUCTION
Under which conditions does the damped harmonic oscillator
return to the equilibrium state the fastest? Standard textbooks
answer that the oscillator returns to the equilibrium state the
fastest in the critically damped regime, regardless of the initial
conditions.1–5Since none of the solutions to this model ever
exactly reach the equilibrium state, but only asymptotically
approach it, textbook authors usually justify this answer by con-
sidering the convergence speed of the general underdamped,
critically damped, and overdamped solutions toward the equi-
librium state in the inﬁnite time limit.1Indeed, in that asymp-
totic sense, the critically damped solution approaches the
equilibrium state faster than the others. The situation becomes
more subtle when experimental resolution is taken into account;
one can determine the damping coefﬁcient in the underdamped
regime for which the oscillator settles down fastest to equilib-
rium by setting the maximal overshoot to be equal to the dis-
placement resolution.6Similarly, Heald7sets the minimum
detectable overshoot equal to the displacement resolution and
computes the degree of underdamping that would be mistaken
for critical due to the fastest return to the equilibrium.
In this paper, we theoretically ﬁnd the time interval during
which the envelope of the underdamped displacement is
smaller in magnitude than the displacement of a critically
damped oscillator using the Lambert W function.8Depending
on the damping coefﬁcient, we determine the instant at which
the envelope of underdamped displacement becomes larger
than the displacement of the critically damped oscillator. We
ﬁnd that displacements at and after that moment are experi-
mentally practically immeasurable for damping coefﬁcients
that are well within the underdamped regime, e.g., 10%
smaller than the critical damping coefﬁcient.
In the ideal case, the equilibrium state is the zero energy
state, with both the displacement and the velocity equal to
zero; here, we deﬁne the equilibrium state as the state in
which the energy of the oscillator has dropped to a certain
(inﬁnitesimal) fraction of the initial energy, e.g., below a
given experimental energy resolution. We show that it ispossible to ﬁnd an optimal damping coefﬁcient in the under-
damped regime for which the system’s energy will fall belowthis predetermined threshold sooner than for any otherunderdamped, critically damped, or overdamped oscillatorswith the same initial conditions. An exception to this is aspecial set of initial conditions for which an overdamped
oscillator reaches the equilibrium state sooner than all others,
regardless of whether we deﬁne the equilibrium state as azero energy state or as a state with some inﬁnitesimal frac-tion of initial energy. To check our statements experimen-tally, we designed an RLC circuit with variable parametersand measured the oscillating voltage across the resistor usinga standard laboratory oscilloscope. The measurements areconsistent with the theoretical ﬁndings.
