Interested In
Sarah Frances Whiting: A foremother of American women physicists
Am. J. Phys.  (November 2005)
Sarah Frances Whiting
Sarah Frances Whiting and the “photography of the invisible”
Physics T oday  (August 2020) 04 October 2023 22:52:39
Sarah Frances Whiting, pioneer of laboratory instruction in astronomy
Joanna Behrmana)
Center for History of Physics, American Institute of Physics, 1 Physics Ellipse, College Park, Maryland 20740
(Received 22 October 2022; accepted 30 March 2023)
Sarah Frances Whiting developed innovative and inﬂuential laboratory work in her introductory
astronomy classes at Wellesley College in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Whiting was stronglyinﬂuenced by Edward Pickering and the early physics laboratory education at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. This article explores the early development of laboratory work in astronomy
education at Wellesley and Whiting’s underlying philosophy of education. By laboratory work,
Whiting meant day-time work, including work with astronomical photographs and spectroscopy. Her
pedagogy was encapsulated in her phrase “to sharpen the pencil sharpens the mind,” whichreferenced the importance of a student’s familiarity with tools as well as the role of drawing in
astronomical work. Whiting further modeled her instruction after the work being conducted at the
Harvard College Observatory in order to prepare her students for potential future employment asastronomers.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0131617
I. INTRODUCTION
Sarah Frances Whiting has been justly called a
“foremother of American women physicists” for her con-struction of an inﬂuential and innovative physics departmentat Wellesley College.
1After the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), Wellesley College was one of the earliestinstitutions in the United States to develop undergraduateteaching laboratories in 1878—in large part because ofWhiting.
2Her development of astronomical education was
equally as inﬂuential and innovative as her work in physics,
and some of her students, like Annie Jump Cannon, went onto become famous astronomers in their own right. This arti-cle examines the early development of astronomy educationat Wellesley, in particular, Whiting’s creation of a laboratoryastronomy course, modeled after the working practices at theHarvard College Observatory. Whiting’s pedagogicalapproach was at the forefront of laboratory education in theUnited States, and she used the new educational movementas a way to prepare her students for future employment asastronomers.
