Interested In
In this issue: November 2022
American Journal of Physics  (November 2022)
Falling chains
Am. J. Phys.  (June 2006)
Falling Sticks and Falling Balls
The Physics T eacher  (September 2002) 04 October 2023 23:20:40
Free fall of a quantum many-body system
A.Colcelli and G. Mussardo
SISSA and INFN, Sezione di Trieste, Via Bonomea 265, I-34136 Trieste, Italy
G.Sierra
Instituto de F /C19ısica Te /C19orica, UAM/CSIC, Universidad Aut /C19onoma de Madrid, C/ Nicol /C19as Cabrera 13–15, 28049
Madrid, Spain
A.Trombettoni
Department of Physics, University of Trieste, Strada Costiera 11, I-34151 Trieste, Italy and SISSA and INFN,
Sezione di Trieste, Via Bonomea 265, I-34136 Trieste, Italy
(Received 29 July 2020; accepted 26 July 2022)
The quantum version of the free fall problem is a topic often skipped in undergraduate quantum
mechanics courses, because its discussion usually requires wavepackets built on the Airy
functions—a difﬁcult computation. Here, on the contrary, we show that the problem can be nicelysimpliﬁed both for a single particle and for general many-body systems by making use of a gauge
transformation that corresponds to a change of reference frame from the laboratory frame to the
one comoving with the falling system. Using this approach, the quantum mechanics problem of aparticle in an external gravitational potential reduces to a much simpler one where there is no
longer any gravitational potential in the Schr €odinger equation. It is instructive to see that the same
procedure can be used for many-body systems subjected to an external gravitational potential and atwo-body interparticle potential that is a function of the distance between the particles. This topic
provides a helpful and pedagogical example of a quantum many-body system whose dynamics can
be analytically described in simple terms.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association
of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0013427
I. INTRODUCTION
In classical mechanics, one of the ﬁrst problems that stu-
dents encounter is the dynamics of a falling body: an object
pulled down to the ground (e.g., from Pisa’s tower) by the
constant force of Earth’s gravity. However, amazinglyenough, the same problem is not always discussed in quan-tum mechanics courses due to the sharp contrast between thephysical simplicity of the problem and the difﬁculty of itsmathematical description. Basic quantum mechanics courses
are largely structured around solving the time-dependent
Schr €odinger equation i/C22hð@w=@tÞ¼Hwfor the wavefunction
wðx;tÞin terms of the eigenfunctions W, which solve the
time-independent equation HW¼EW. Indeed, in traditional
approaches to the problem of determining the wavefunctionat time t, it is necessary to involve the Airy functions and the
projection of the falling body’s wavefunction into this set of
eigenfunctions. Resorting to the Eherenfest theorem provides
expressions for position or momentum expectation valuesbut does not provide immediate insight into the simple solu-tion of the system. Solving the problem using a time-dependent variational approach might reveal the solution’ssimple structure, but this technique is not introduced in manyuniversity quantum mechanics courses. Here, we show that
an alternative way to deal with the quantum falling body is
pedagogically simple but also general enough to be applica-ble to the single particle case and to quantum many-bodysystems. This approach exploits the use of a gauge transfor-mation of the wavefunction that corresponds to a change ofreference frame from the inertial laboratory frame to the fall-
ing body’s accelerated frame. By gauge transformation, we
mean the multiplication of the wavefunction by a phase fac-tor. This multiplication will not affect expectation values ofphysical observables like the position of a wavepacket. Inthe new reference frame, there is of course no longer any
gravitational effect, and therefore, the system appears to be“free,” i.e., not subject to gravity. A few comments on termi-nology are in order. Throughout the paper, we sometimesrefer to a system in the absence of gravity as “free.” This isnot to be confused with an alternative meaning of “free” as“non-interacting.” Later, we will discuss interacting systemsof particles; to avoid confusion, we will refer to the interact-ing system in the absence of gravity as the “non-falling” sys-tem. (Of course, a system in “free fall” is not “free” in eithersense of the word discussed above.)
It is worth emphasizing that the method discussed here can
be applied to study the effect of the gravitational force on a
quantum many-body system, where particles with position
vectors r
jandrkinteract via a generic two-body potential of
the form Vðjrj/C0rkjÞ. This leads to some interesting results.
For instance, as we discuss in the following, the time evolution
of observables, such as the variance of the position of a falling
wavepacket, is the same as the time evolution for a free wave-packet. The effect of gravity shows up solely in the behaviorof the expectation values of position (and powers thereof)
which, on the other hand, can be obtained from the classical
Newton’s second law of motion. This last point follows fromthe Ehrenfest theorem (see, e.g., Ref. 1), from which we can
infer that the momentum of the wavepacket varies linearly
with time while its position has a quadratic time dependence.
This last fact is valid for a generic interaction potential in anynumber of dimensions; in this paper, we will focus on one- and
three-dimensional cases as explanatory examples. We will also
show how to easily determine the expressions for the energyand the total momentum of the falling many-body systemusing the basic commutation rules. Finally, we show how to
relate the one-body density matrix of the falling body to the
corresponding density matrix of the “free” (although possibly
833 Am. J. Phys. 90(11), November 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 833 04 October 2023 23:20:40
interacting) non-falling system and give a simple relationship
between the eigenvalues of the two density matrices.
Employing a gauge transformation to deal with quantum
free fall was already presented in Refs. 2and3for the single
particle case in one dimension only; here, we will show that it
can be extended to the case of interacting many-body quan-tum systems in more than one dimension, broadening theinterest on this topic. In all of these examples, we will work
in the Schr €odinger picture, in such a way that the method
used to tackle the single quantum particle case can then beapplied to the many-body problem, keeping the same formal-
ism and hence giving a ﬂuid extension of applicability.
