Interested In
Derivatives of the Dirac delta function by explicit construction of sequences
American Journal of Physics  (May 2003)
Bound states of a one-dimensional Dirac equation with multiple delta-potentials
Low T emp. Phys.  (December 2022)
The Dirac Delta ‐ Function and the Summation of Fourier Series
Journal of Applied Physics  (June 2004) 04 October 2023 22:58:05
Scattering of identical particles by a one-dimensional Dirac delta
function barrier potential: The role of statistics
P. R . Bermana)
Physics Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1040
Alberto G. Rojob)
Department of Physics, Oakland University, Rochester, Michigan 48309
(Received 1 March 2022; accepted 24 July 2023)
Scattering of non-interacting, identical bosons or fermions by a one-dimensional Dirac delta
function barrier potential underlines the importance of the role of statistics (that is, whether the
particles obey Fermi–Dirac or Bose–Einstein statistics) in the scattering. We consider an initialwave function for the system that corresponds to one particle incident from the left and one from
the right of the potential barrier. For bosons, both particles are scattered either to the left or to the
right if the intensity reﬂection coefﬁcient is 1/2, provided the left and right propagating wavepackets fully overlap in the scattering region. For fermions, the particles “pass through” one
another, provided the left and right propagating wave packets fully overlap in the scattering region,
with zero probability that both particles are scattered to the left or right, consistent with the Pauliexclusion principle.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0089907
I. INTRODUCTION
In an introductory quantum mechanics course, students
often learn about the concepts of spin and statistics.Speciﬁcally, they are told that the wave function for a system
of identical bosons must be symmetric under the interchange
of any two particles, and the wave function for identical fer-mions must be antisymmetric under the interchange of any
two particles. Feynman et al.
1provided an elementary dis-
cussion of how the scattering cross section of two indistin-guishable particles by one another depends on whether they
are bosons or fermions. For non-interacting particles, exam-
ples are sometimes given in which the energy levels arecalculated for identical bosons or fermions placed in a one-
dimensional, inﬁnite potential well.
2On the other hand,
introductory courses do not usually include examples involv-ing the scattering of a pair of bosons or fermions by a one-
dimensional potential. This is unfortunate, since the results
clearly demonstrate the importance of the scattering ampli-tudes on the nature (bosonic or fermionic) of the particles.
Moreover, the resulting physics is qualitatively different
from that encountered in particle–particle scattering.
In this paper, we consider scattering of two non-
interacting identical bosons or fermions by a delta function
barrier potential. Instead of using a time-independent
approach from which the reﬂection and transmission ampli-
tudes could be obtained, we prefer to use a time-dependent
approach in which an initial wave packet is incident uponand scattered by the potential. This approach allows us to
explore the dynamics of the scattering. In effect, the delta
function potential acts as a “beam-splitter.” The particles areincident from opposite sides of the barrier. If the particle
wave packets do not overlap as they are scattered by the bar-
rier, the scattering is the same as it would be had the particlesbeen distinguishable—there is no difference for bosons and
fermions. In other words, although, in principle, it is
always necessary to symmetrize or anti-symmetrize thewave functions for identical particles, as long as the wave
packets of the particles never overlap, they can be treated as
distinguishable. On the other hand, the scattering differsdramatically for fermions and bosons when the wave packets
of the two particles dooverlap in the potential region. For a
50–50 beam splitter and perfect overlap, both bosons arescattered to either the right or the left, while the fermions arescattered one to each side of the potential. These results con-stitute another of the amazing predictions of quantummechanics. Even if the particles are separated initially by a
distance much larger than the extent of their wave packets, it
is still necessary to symmetrize or anti-symmetrize the com-posite wave function if the wave packets are destined tomeet in the scattering region.
The results of this calculation for bosons are fully analo-
gous to those involving Hong–Ou–Mandel (HOM) interfer-ence
3of photons in an interferometric scheme involving a
beam splitter. In HOM interference, two single-photonpulses are sent into the two input channels of a 50–50 beamsplitter and overlap at the beam splitter. It is observed thatthe photons emerge in one or the other output arms of the
beam splitter—the probability to observe one photon in each
of the output arms is identically equal to zero, an effectattributed to the bosonic nature of photons. Analogous calcu-lations for particles, both bosons and fermions, were carriedout by Loudon.
4In his calculation, Loudon uses an input-
output theory of the beam-splitter involving creation andannihilation operators for the various modes, an approachwhich is used commonly in the quantum optics community.In contrast, our calculation is formulated in terms of
quantum-mechanical, one-dimensional scattering by a poten-
tial barrier. As such, it should be accessible to upper-levelundergraduate or beginning graduate students.
