Interested In
Hannay angle study of the Foucault pendulum in action ‐ angle variables
American Journal of Physics  (February 1993)
Heavy symmetric tops and the Hannay angle
Am. J. Phys.  (May 2023)
Hannay’ s hoop beyond asymptotics
Chaos  (August 2018) 04 October 2023 23:10:41
Measuring the Hannay geometric phase
H.Fanchiottia)and C. A. Garc /C19ıa Canal
IFLP/CONICET and Departamento de F /C19ısica, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, C.C.67,
1900 La Plata, Argentina
M.Mayosky
LEICI/CONICET, Facultad de Ingenier /C19ıa, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, 1900 La Plata, Argentina and
Comisi /C19on de Investigaciones Cient /C19ıﬁcas de la Provincia de Buenos Aires-CICpBA, 1900 La Plata, Argentina
A.Veigab)
LEICI/CONICET, Facultad de Ingenier /C19ıa, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, 1900 La Plata, Argentina
V.Ventoc)
Departamento de F /C19ısica Te /C19orica-IFIC, Universidad de Valencia-CSIC, Burjassot, E-46100 Valencia, Spain
(Received 7 December 2021; accepted 7 March 2022)
The Hannay geometric phase is the classical analog of the well-known Berry phase. Its most
familiar example is the effect of the latitude kon the motion of a Foucault pendulum. We describe
an electronic network whose behavior is exactly equivalent to that of the pendulum. The circuit can
be constructed from off-the-shelf components using two matched transconductance ampliﬁers thatcomprise a gyrator to introduce the non-reciprocal behavior needed to mimic the pendulum. One
may precisely measure the dependence of the Hannay phase on kby circuit simulation and by
laboratory measurements on a constructed circuit.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0081149
I. INTRODUCTION
Classical and quantum mechanical systems that return to
their initial state after a period of time evolution are of spe-cial interest in physics. After an adiabatic cyclic transforma-tion, quantum systems acquire, besides the standard
dynamical phase, an additional phase that depends only on
the geometry of the path taken. This is the well-known Berryphase.
1A similar type of phase was discovered by
Pancharatnam when studying the polarization of light.2For
classical systems in which the Hamiltonian includes time-dependent parameters, the dynamics can be quite compli-
cated. However, if these parameters change very slowly over
the period of the time-independent Hamiltonian, the dynam-ics is nearly periodic, as predicted by the adiabatic theoremin classical mechanics. In this case, the conserved quantity is
the phase space area enclosed by the system’s trajectory, i.e.,
the action. The angle associated with the action has a dynam-ical contribution set by the period and an additional contribu-
tion that depends only on the geometry of the cycle and not
on the period. This extra, purely geometric phase is calledthe Hannay angle.
3In 1851, Leon Foucault used a very tall
and heavy pendulum to demonstrate the Earth’s rotation. It
was found that the oscillation plane of the pendulum had a
rotation frequency that depended on the latitude where it waslocated,4perhaps the most familiar example of a classical
geometric phase. In our opinion, the Foucault pendulum pro-
vides an ideal introduction to the physics of the geometricphase.5The aim of this article is to describe an electronic
circuit that is an exact analog to the pendulum. In contrast
to previously proposed circuits, which used time-dependent
circuit elements6(see also Refs. 7–9), ours can be easily con-
structed with off-the-shelf components. This allows the
Hannay phase to be investigated by students via simulation
and with simple laboratory apparatus.