ICS| MARCH 01 2023
Singular Lagrangians and the Dirac–Bergmann algorithm in
classical mechanics 
J. David Brown  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 214–224 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0107540
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Bergmann ‐ Bianchi identities in field theories
AIP Conference Proceedings  (March 2005)
Presymplectic manifolds and the Dirac–Bergmann theory of constraints
J. Math. Phys.  (August 2008)
Elastic constants of plastic crystals by Schaefer ‐ Bergmann scattering
Rev Sci Instrum  (October 1984) 04 October 2023 22:50:20
ADVANCED TOPICS SECTION
The Advanced Topics Section is meant for articles that deal with physics more advanced than is typical of
regular articles in AJP. Though advanced, these articles have been judged to give clear presentations of
material useful to a segment of AJP readers.
Singular Lagrangians and the Dirac–Bergmann algorithm in classical
mechanics
J. David Browna)
Department of Physics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695
(Received 5 July 2022; accepted 20 November 2022)
Textbook treatments of classical mechanics typically assume that the Lagrangian is nonsingular;
that is, the matrix of second derivatives of the Lagrangian with respect to the velocities is
invertible. This assumption ensures that (i) Lagrange’s equations can be solved for theaccelerations as functions of coordinates and velocities, and (ii) the deﬁnitions of the conjugate
momenta can be inverted to solve for the velocities as functions of coordinates and momenta. This
assumption, however, is unnecessarily restrictive—there are interesting classical dynamicalsystems with singular Lagrangians. The algorithm for analyzing such systems was developed by
Dirac and Bergmann in the 1950s. After a brief review of the Dirac–Bergmann algorithm, several
examples are presented using familiar components: point masses connected by massless springs,rods, cords, and pulleys.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0107540
I. INTRODUCTION
The central focus of any advanced book on classical
mechanics is the Lagrangian formulation of dynamics. Withfew exceptions, these books assume that the LagrangianLðq;_qÞis nonsingular. That is, the matrix
L
ij/C17@2L
@_qi@_qj(1)
of second derivatives of Lwith respect to the velocities _qi
/C17dqi=dtis invertible. If Lijis not invertible, we cannot solve
Lagrange’s equations for the accelerations as functions ofthe coordinates and velocities.
The starting point for the Hamiltonian formulation of
mechanics is the Lagrangian. If L
ijis not invertible, the deﬁ-
nitions of momenta in terms of coordinates and velocitiescannot be inverted for the velocities as functions of coordi-
nates and momenta. The Hamiltonian theory cannot be con-
structed in the usual way.
The purpose of this article is to point out that there are, in
fact, physically interesting classical dynamical systems withsingular Lagrangians. The formalism for treating such systems
was developed in the 1950s by Dirac
1–5a n db yB e r g m a n na n d
collaborators,6–11following earlier work by Rosenfeld.12This
formalism is referred to as the Dirac–Bergmann algorithm. Tobe more precise, Dirac and Bergmann, and also Rosenfeld,13
showed that a singular Lagrangian system can be placed in theform of a “constrained Hamiltonian system” in which the evo-lution is constrained to a subspace of phase space. The singu-lar nature of the system is most clearly exhibited in the
Hamiltonian form.
The primary motivation for Dirac and Bergmann was to under-
stand the structure of ﬁeld theories such as electromagnetism andgeneral relativity. These theories, as well as Yang–Mills the-
ory and string theory, are gauge theories—they containdegrees of freedom that do not alter the physical state of thesystem. Gauge theories are described by singularLagrangians, but (as will be seen in the examples) not all sin-gular Lagrangian systems are gauge theories.
In Sec. 