IL 01 2022
Continuous gravitational waves in the lab: Recovering audio
signals with a table-top optical microphone 
James W . Gardner ; Hannah Middleton ; Changrong Liu ; Andrew Melatos ; Robin Evans ; William Moran ;
Deeksha Beniwal ; Huy T uong Cao ; Craig Ingram ; Daniel Brown ; Sebastian Ng
Am. J. Phys.  90, 286–296 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009409
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A simple turbidimeter for rapid determination of low bacteria concentrations
Rev Sci Instrum  (November 2003)
Polarizability anisotropy relaxation in liquid ethanol: A molecular dynamics study
J. Chem. Phys.  (August 2002)
Comparative study of original recover and recover KL in separable non-negative matrix factorization for
topic detection in T witter
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 2017) 04 October 2023 23:06:53
Continuous gravitational waves in the lab: Recovering audio signals
with a table-top optical microphone
James W. Gardnera)
Centre for Gravitational Astrophysics, The Australian National University, Acton, ACT 2601, Australia;
OzGrav-ANU, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery,
The Australian National University, Acton, ACT 2601, Australia; and School of Physics,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
Hannah Middletonb)
School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Centre for Astrophysics and
Supercomputing, Swinburne University of Technology, Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, Australia; OzGrav-
Melbourne, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery, Parkville,
Victoria 3010, Australia; and School of Physics and Astronomy and Institute for Gravitational Wave
Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 9TT, United Kingdom
Changrong Liuc)
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia and OzGrav-Melbourne, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave
Discovery, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
Andrew Melatosd)
School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia and OzGrav-Melbourne,
Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia
Robin Evans
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia and OzGrav-Melbourne, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Gravitational WaveDiscovery, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
William Moran
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010,
Australia
Deeksha Beniwal
Department of Physics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia;
The Institute of Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), The University of Adelaide, Adelaide,South Australia 5005, Australia; and OzGrav-Adelaide, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for
Gravitational Wave Discovery, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia
Huy Tuong Cao
Department of Physics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia;
The Institute of Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia 5005, Australia; and OzGrav-Adelaide, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for
Gravitational Wave Discovery, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia
Craig Ingram
Department of Physics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia;
The Institute of Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SouthAustralia 5005, Australia; and OzGrav-Adelaide, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for
Gravitational Wave Discovery, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia
Daniel Brown
Department of Physics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia;
The Institute of Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), The University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
South Australia 5005, Australia; and OzGrav-Adelaide, Australian Research Council Centre ofExcellence for Gravitational Wave Discovery, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia
Sebastian Ng
Department of Physics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia;
The Institute of Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SouthAustralia 5005, Australia; and OzGrav-Adelaide, Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for
Gravitational Wave Discovery, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia
(Received 19 November 2020; accepted 7 December 2021)
Gravitational-wave observatories around the world are searching for continuous waves: persistent
signals from sources, such as spinning neutron stars. These searches use sophisticated statisticaltechniques to look for weak signals in noisy data. In this paper, we demonstrate these techniques
using a table-top model gravitational-wave detector: a Michelson interferometer where sound is
used as an analog for gravitational waves. Using signal processing techniques from continuous-wave
286 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 286 04 October 2023 23:06:53
searches, we demonstrate the recovery of tones with constant and wandering frequencies. We also
explore the use of the interferometer as a teaching tool for educators in physics and electrical
engineering by using it as an “optical microphone” to capture music and speech. A range of ﬁltering
techniques used to recover signals from noisy data are detailed in the supplementary material of thisarticle. Here, we present the highlights of our results using a combined notch plus Wiener ﬁlter
and the statistical log minimum mean-square error (logMMSE) estimator. Using these techniques,
we easily recover recordings of simple chords and drums, but complex music and speech are morechallenging. This demonstration can be used by educators in undergraduate laboratories and can be
adapted for communicating gravitational-wave and signal-processing topics to nonspecialist
audiences.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009409
I. INTRODUCTION
In 2015, the ﬁrst detection of gravitational waves from the
merger of two black holes marked a breakthrough in modern
astrophysics and revealed a new means to observe theUniverse.1Gravitational waves are a prediction of Albert
Einstein’s theory of General Relativity; they are disturbances
in spacetime caused by the acceleration of asymmetric mas-sive objects. The effect of gravitational waves is a change in
lengths: a “stretching and squashing” of the distance between
objects. Ground-based gravitational-wave observatories,
such as the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational-
wave Observatory (LIGO), Advanced Virgo, GEO600, andKAGRA, use the interference of laser light to measure
changes in distance. These observatories are extremely com-
plex but are fundamentally based on the Michelson interfer-ometer. Table-top interferometers are commonly used in
undergraduate laboratory experiments and to demonstrate
the science of gravitational-wave detection to nonspecialistaudiences.
2
To date, the network of gravitational-wave observatories
has observed short-duration transient signals from the merg-
ers of binary black holes, binary neutron stars, and binariesconsisting of a neutron star and a black hole.3,4However,
the network is also searching for continuous gravitational
waves: persistent, periodic, near-monochromatic signals,which are yet to be detected. Rotating neutron stars are
prime candidates for continuous-wave emission, especially
those in low mass x-ray binaries (LMXB), where the neu-tron star is in orbit with a low mass stellar companion. The
rotation frequency of the neutron star in an LMXB can wan-
der over time due to variable accretion of matter (and henceangular momentum transfer) from the stellar companion.
5
Scorpius X-1 is a prime LMXB target for continuous-wavesearches. Numerous searches, as yet unsuccessful, havebeen performed for Scorpius X-1 and other LMXBs (e.g.,
Ref. 6).
In this paper, we use a table-top Michelson interferometer
as a toy gravitational-wave detector designed to detectsound instead of gravitational waves. We then extend its use
to an “optical microphone,” using light to capture sound,
and present a range of example analysis techniques foreducators to use. As an undergraduate lab experiment, the
apparatus can be used to teach topics ranging from
continuous-wave detection and analysis to electronics, sig-nal processing, and speech enhancement. It allows students
in courses, such as physics and electrical engineering, to
explore the response of an accessible, yet nontrivial, opto-mechanical system using a hierarchy of data analysis techni-
ques of increasing complexity, including those used in thesearch for continuous waves in LIGO and Virgo data.
6,7
This demonstration also has the potential to be used as an
outreach tool alongside a range of other public engagement
demonstrations and activities developed by gravitational-
wave research groups around the world. These tools allowscientists to cater to the increased public and media interest
in this ﬁeld and explain gravitational-wave science to non-
specialist audiences.
This paper is laid out as follows. In Sec. 