Interested In
A Black Hole in Our Galactic Center
The Physics T eacher  (January 2008)
The Distribution of Black Holes in Galaxy Halos
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2009)
Formation of Supermassive Black Hole Binaries and Massive Seed SMBHs in Gas ‐ Rich Mergers
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2010) 04 October 2023 22:52:18
The discovery of a supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky
Way galaxy
Bryanne McDonougha)
Astronomy Department, Boston University, 725 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215
Paul Withersb)
Astronomy Department, Boston University, 725 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215
and Center for Space Physics, Boston University, 725 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215
(Received 23 January 2022; accepted 6 February 2023)
Black holes are fascinating astrophysical objects, yet they are rarely encountered in undergraduate-
level physics courses. Here, we use concepts accessible to upper division physics majors to explain
the discovery of a supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way galaxy, which was
recognized by the award of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics. Infrared observations of the innermostregion of the Milky Way galaxy show that many stars orbit around the galactic center at distances
comparable to the size of the solar system with decadal-scale periods. We show how, given the
sizes and periods of these stellar orbits, Newton’s version of Kepler’s third law can be used todetermine the mass and maximum radius of the concentration of mass at the galactic center. We
consider various possible physical interpretations consistent with this mass and maximum radius,
rejecting ﬂat disks due to dynamical instabilities, clouds of gas and/or dust due to gravitationalinstabilities, and clusters of compact objects due to collisional instabilities. This demonstrates that
a supermassive black hole is the only possible explanation for the observed orbits of stars close to
the galactic center.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0086222
I. INTRODUCTION
As objects whose gravity is strong enough to capture light
itself, black holes are fascinating to undergraduate students
in physics and astronomy. A Newtonian description of black
holes is accessible to students taking a ﬁrst college physics
course, yet students rarely encounter black holes again until
graduate-level physics courses that address general relativity
or upper-division astronomy courses that address galaxies
and active galactic nuclei. We postulate that introducingexamples featuring black holes when teaching other topics in
the physics curriculum will improve student engagement.
Here, we use concepts accessible to upper division physics
majors to explain the discovery of a supermassive black hole
at the center of the Milky Way galaxy. These concepts
include angular size, Doppler shift, uniform circular motion,Newton’s version of Kepler’s third law, kinetic, potential,
and thermal energy, Jeans instability, mean free path, and
gravitational focusing. This article is timely in light of the
award of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics for research related
to the discovery of a supermassive black hole at the center of
the Milky Way galaxy and in light of the release of the ﬁrst
direct image of that black hole in 2022.
In Sec. 