Interested In
Grip-slip behavior of a bouncing ball
American Journal of Physics  (November 2002)
Measurements of the horizontal coef ficient of restitution for a superball and a tennis ball
American Journal of Physics  (May 2002)
A classical experiment revisited: The bounce of balls and superballs in three dimensions
American Journal of Physics  (January 2005) 04 October 2023 23:12:06
Oblique angle collisions of two pendulum balls
Rod Crossa)
School of Physics, University of Sydney, Sydney, 2006, Australia
(Received 13 December 2021; accepted 7 March 2022)
Measurements are presented on oblique angle collisions between two identical balls, each
suspended as pendulum bobs. If one ball is at rest and is struck by the other ball incident withoutspin at an oblique angle, then both balls spin in the same direction after the collision. The results
can be explained in terms of friction between the balls. At glancing angles, the balls slide
throughout the collision. At other angles of incidence, the balls initially slide, then grip, and then
slide again when the balls release their grip. The collision can be described in terms of two
different coefﬁcients of restitution: one involving the normal incident and post-collision speeds andthe other involving the tangential speeds of the contact points before and after the collision. The
coefﬁcient of restitution and the collision time vary with the collision speed but remain relatively
constant if the speed changes by a factor less than about two.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license
by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0082240
I. INTRODUCTION
A head-on collision between two balls is a standard topic
in elementary mechanics courses and has been studied by
researchers since Newton’s time to measure the coefﬁcientof restitution or the collision time or to examine the Hertzmodel of collisions between spheres. If the path of the center
of mass of one ball is not coincident with the center of mass
of the other ball then the collision is called an oblique-angleor off-center collision. Much less attention has been given tooblique angle collisions between two spheres, although sev-
eral studies have been reported on oblique collisions of bil-
liard balls.
1–3In those studies, friction between the balls was
ignored since billiard balls are very smooth and since theauthors were mainly interested in the effects of friction
between the ball and the billiard table. Mungan and
Lipscombe described oblique angle collisions between ballsof different mass and diameter, also ignoring friction.
4
Oblique collisions between pucks and disks have also been
investigated with similar results.5–9In an ideal, perfectly
elastic, and zero friction world, if one circular object is inci-dent obliquely on an identical object at rest then the twoobjects emerge at right angles to each other after the colli-
sion. Disks and spheres behave in the same manner in that
respect and can be described by the same collision equations.
Experimental measurements of oblique angle collisions
between spheres are rare. Labous et al. presented measure-
ments of the normal and tangential coefﬁcients of restitution
for oblique collisions of nylon spheres.
10A similar experi-
ment was described by Foerster et al. using small glass and
acetate spheres.11Both experiments were undertaken by pro-
jecting two spheres along separate paths so that they collided
with each other, the result being recorded on a video ﬁlm.
That type of experiment is technically difﬁcult and was con-ducted to investigate the basic physics of collisions betweensmall granular particles.
A simpler experimental arrangement is described in the
present paper, suitable for student use, using two pendulum
balls as shown in Fig. 1. Each ball was suspended by identi-
cal lengths of string from two horizontal rods separatedby about one ball diameter. Steel balls were suspended by
passing the string through a small tube welded to the top of
the ball, allowing the balls to rotate freely. A similararrangement, but with a biﬁlar suspension, is commonly
used to support each ball in Newton’s cradle. Other balls
were suspended by passing the string through a vertical hole
drilled through the ball, also allowing for free rotation. Theupper end of the string was tied ﬁrmly to its support rod but
could be pushed by hand along the rod. While one ball
remained at rest, the other ball was pulled aside and allowedto collide with the ball at rest. The angle of incidence was
varied by moving the upper end of one pendulum along its
supporting rod. The collision was ﬁlmed from above at 300frames s
/C01to measure the incident and post-collision speeds
and angles immediately before and after the collision, before
tension in the supporting strings affected the results.
Regardless of the type of ball used, the balls emerge at an
angle less than 90/C14to each other, and both balls spin in the
same direction at about the same rotation speed after the col-
lision. Both effects are due to friction between the balls. The
initial angular momentum of the incident ball is conserved asa result of the collision, which helps us to explain how rota-
tion arises even when neither ball is rotating initially.
6,9
Details of the collision process depend on whether the balls
impact at small glancing angles, in which case sliding fric-
tion controls the dynamics, or whether the balls collide at
larger angles, in which case static friction determines theoutcome. Four different balls were examined using this
method, and the results are presented below, together with a
theoretical model of the collision process.
