In this paper, we introduce an experiment that can be used to measure the nonlinearfrequency response curve of a regular tuning fork. Using double-grating Doppler interferometry,
we achieve measurement precision of the oscillation amplitude in the range of microns. With this
experimental setup, we observe nonlinear behaviors of the tuning fork, such as the softeningfrequency response curve and the jump phenomenon. This provides an integrated experiment for
intermediate-level students and a basis for senior research projects.
#2022 Published under an exclusive
license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0011387
I. INTRODUCTION
Tuning forks are frequently used as stable frequency refer-
ences, but their vibrational modes are surprisingly compli-cated. A model for tuning forks that approximates the tinesas cantilevers (i.e., levers with one end ﬁxed and the other
end free) provides a satisfactory explanation for the vibration
modes and their corresponding frequencies, as long as thevibration amplitudes are sufﬁciently small. These modeshave been previously studied by Rossing et al.
1For in-plane
symmetric modes, the modal frequencies are
fn¼pa
16L2/C18/C19ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
E
3qs
1:1942;2:9882;52;72;…;ð2n/C01Þ2hi
;
(1)
where ais the thickness of the fork’s beam, Lis the length of
the tines, Eis Young’s elastic modulus, and qis the density
of the fork’s material. Note that the frequency of the secondsymmetric mode (the “clang mode”) predicted in Eq. (1)is
over six times (2 :988
2=1:1942times) the principal mode f0,
much higher than small harmonic frequencies such as 2 f0
and 3 f0that are observed in a tuning fork’s spectrum.
These harmonics are due to the non-sinusoidal motion of the
tines, which implies a nonlinear restoring force. To explore
this nonlinearity, we measure frequency response curves. In
the linear region, the maximum response occurs close to thenatural frequency, and the resonance frequency and the Qfac-
tor are independent of amplitude. Nonlinearity occurs at large
amplitudes, where the frequency response curves become
amplitude dependent. The system may harden as the amplitudeincreases, meaning that the resonant peak shifts to a higher fre-quency, or it may soften if the peak shifts to a lower fre-
quency.
2When the driving force exceeds a critical value, the
frequency response curve may become multivalued. The multi-valuedness of the frequency response curve gives rise to a
“jump phenomenon” in which the system transitions between
stable branches on the frequency response curve as the fre-quency changes, leading to an impressive discontinuity andhysteresis in the frequency response curve. In other words, the
oscillation amplitude will depend on whether the driving fre-
quency increases or decreases to a speciﬁc value.
We show how these nonlinear characteristics of tuning forks
can be studied in the undergraduate laboratory. In Sec. 