Interested In
Tunable damping-like and field-like spin-orbit-torque in Pt/Co/HfO 2 films via interfacial charge transfer
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (October 2019)
Surveillance of medium and high Earth orbits using large baseline stereovision
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2014)
Small satellite attitude determination based on GPS/IMU data fusion
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2014) 04 October 2023 23:10:45
Modelling the Earth’s magnetic field
Nuno Barros e S /C19aa)
Institute of Marine Sciences—Okeanos, University of the Azores, Rua Prof. Doutor Frederico Machado 4,
9901-862 Horta, Portugal
Lourenc ¸oFaria, Bernardo Alves,b)and Miguel Cymbron
Escola Secund /C19aria Domingos Rebelo, Av. Antero de Quental, 9504-501 Ponta Delgada, Portugal
(Received 11 October 2021; accepted 13 March 2022)
The Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld can be decomposed into spherical harmonics, and the exact coefﬁcients
of the decomposition can be determined through a few measurements of its value at different
locations. Using measurements from a magnetometer on board the International Space Station, we
computed the multipolar moments of an expansion in spherical harmonics to order 3, calculated thelocation of the magnetic dip poles, and produced an intensity map of the magnetic ﬁeld across the
globe. The accuracy of the results was evaluated by comparison with data from the International
Geomagnetic Reference Field.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics
Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0074846
I. INTRODUCTION
The Laplace equation,
r2V¼0; (1)
shows up early in an electromagnetism course in the context
of electrostatics (Ref. 1, Chap. 1). Solving the Laplace equa-
tion in spherical coordinates leads to the expansion of theelectrostatic potential Vin spherical harmonics:1
Vr;h;/ðÞ ¼X1
l¼1Xl
m¼0AlmrlþBlm
rlþ1/C20/C21
/C2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2lþ1 ðÞ l/C0mðÞ !
4plþmðÞ !s
PlmcoshðÞ eim/: (2)
Here, r,h, and /are, respectively, the distance to the origin,
the polar angle, and the azimuthal angle. AlmandBlmare the
expansion coefﬁcients, and PlmðxÞis the associated Legendre
polynomial; landmare called the degree and order of the
spherical harmonics, respectively.
In this article, we propose a real-life application of the
multipolar expansion of the solution to the Laplace equation
to the case of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. From the compari-
son of a limited number of measurements to this seriesexpansion, one can reconstruct the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeldabove its surface and determine the location of the magneticdip poles. This project relates the theory with real data and
allows easy comparison with tabulated data, making it a nice
tool in the teaching of electromagnetism.
In the work carried out by our students (presented in Sec.
IV), measurements of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld were per-
formed on board the International Space Station (ISS) at
points along its orbit. However, this project can be applied to
other situations such as measurements collected from differ-ent locations on the surface of the Earth (Sec. 