Interested In
Eigen microstates and their evolution of global ozone at dif ferent geopotential heights
Chaos  (July 2021)
Number of microstates and configurational entropy for steady-state two-phase flows in pore networks
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2015)
Microstability properties of the EBT boundary layer
Physics of Fluids  (July 1982) 04 October 2023 23:18:13
Exploring entropy by counting microstates of the p-state paramagnet
Steuard Jensena)
Department of Physics and Engineering, Alma College, Alma, Michigan 48801
(Received 25 June 2021; accepted 24 August 2022)
Moore and Schroeder proposed an effective approach to introducing entropy and the second law
through computational study of models with easily countable states at ﬁxed energy. However, suchsystems are rare: the only familiar examples are the Einstein solid and the two-state paramagnet,
which limits the available questions for assignment or discussion. This work considers the more
general p-state paramagnet and describes the modestly more complicated counting of its
microstates. An instructor can draw on this family of systems to assign a variety of new problems
or open-ended projects that students can complete with the help of a spreadsheet program oranalytic calculation.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0061383
I. INTRODUCTION
Entropy is perhaps the most central concept in thermal
physics, but students often struggle to understand it. The
classical equation deﬁning entropy Sfrom heat Qand tem-
perature T,dS/C21/C22dQ=T, leads directly to the crucial second
law of thermodynamics. Total entropy always increases as
sub-systems equilibriate with heat ﬂowing from hot to cold,
since dS/C21/C22dQ=Tcþ/C22dQ=Th>0w h e n Tc<Th. However,
this provides no intuition for what entropy is. Introductorytexts often use fuzzy, inprecise language to explain that
entropy somehow measures the randomness or (worse)
“disorder” of a system. But, how does this concept relate tothe mathematical deﬁnition?
The statistical deﬁnition of entropy is much more concrete
than “disorder.” Entropy is the log of the number of micro-
states, X, corresponding to a given macrostate with total
energy Uspread over Nparticles: S¼klnXðN;UÞ, where k
is Boltzmann’s constant. Temperature is then given a quanti-
tative deﬁnition relative to entropy, 1 =T¼@S=@U. So higher
entropy means higher probability, and the tendency of a sys-
tem to move to a more probable state hints at the second law.However, it’s still not clear why this should mean that heat
ﬂows from hot to cold, nor why these probabilistic state-
ments should lead to an absolute “law” for macroscopicsystems.
This challenge of introducing entropy in a meaningful
way was discussed by Moore and Schroeder,
1who proposed
that students build intuition about entropy, temperature, and
the second law through computational statistical calculations
with systems composed of subsystems that can exchangeenergy. Through this concrete exercise, students can see that
the composite system’s most probable microstate (with the
highest entropy) doesn’t necessarily spread energy outequally among subsystems, but that the subsystem tempera-
tures arelikely to be equal. Introductory texts sometimes
attempt similar demonstrations but use quite small systems
whose multiplicities can be computed by hand: too small to
properly convey the inevitibility of the second law. Moreadvanced texts consider larger systems but traditionally rely
on limits and approximations that provide little intuition for
students. Computational analysis permits study of systemslarge enough to clearly show irreversible behavior but still
small enough for explicit calculations.
Moore incorporated this approach into his introductory
textbook Six Ideas That Shaped Physics
2with the help of acustom-built application to automate the process, and
Chabay and Sherwood used it in their Matter & Interactions
textbook.3At the intermediate to advanced undergraduate
level, Schroeder’s textbook Thermal Physics4asks students
to perform their own analysis in a spreadsheet program like
Microsoft Excel. Such tools are readily available and often
familiar, avoiding the need to teach formal programming.
This paper addresses a limitation of Moore and
Schroeder’s approach that becomes especially apparent
when teaching more advanced students: there are only twophysical systems whose states are easy to count explicitly,
the Einstein solid and the two-state paramagnet. This means
that there are limited options for homework and exam ques-
tions. If one system is explained in detail to illustrate the
method and then students are asked to apply their under-standing to analyze the second in homework, there is no dis-
tinct third system available to use for further practice or
assessment. Also, students seeking deeper understanding
have nothing to explore for larger projects or curiosity-
driven questions.
Here, we show how an expanded class of systems, the
“p-state paramagnets,” can be analyzed using similar state
counting. At the minimum value p¼2, this coincides with
the two-state case considered by Moore and Schroeder, andwhen p!1 , it is formally equivalent to the Einstein solid
model. Between those extremes, explicit state counting is
more complicated. However, once the multiplicities are in
hand, the subsequent analysis proceeds the same way, and its
results can teach interesting things about the relationshipbetween the two simplest systems.
In what follows, Sec. 