I. INTRODUCTION
A. Condensation of objects
The early Universe was a hot plasma of fundamental rela-
tivistic particles: quarks, leptons, photons, and gluons. Therewere no composite objects such as protons, atoms, planets,or galaxies.
1–5As the Universe cooled, composite objects
condensed out of the background much as droplets of steamcondense out of hot water vapor as it cools. This condensa-tion happened when the binding energy of an objectexceeded the background energy. For example, as theUniverse expanded and cooled during the quark-hadron tran-sition, the binding energy of the strong force overcame thebackground energy as the quark-gluon plasma condensedinto protons, neutrons, and other hadrons. With furtherexpansion and decrease in temperature, during the epoch ofbig bang nucleosynthesis, the binding energy of the residualstrong force overcame the background energy as the hotplasma of protons and neutrons condensed into atomicnuclei. Further expansion and cooling led to the formation ofhelium and then hydrogen atoms when the binding energy of
coulomb forces overcame the background energy. With fur-
ther cooling, chemical bond energies overcame the kineticenergy of atoms as they condensed into molecules. Furthercooling allowed matter-overdensities to form stars, planets,galaxies, and clusters of galaxies as their gravitational bind-ing energy overcame their kinetic energy.
1,2
As a result of this sequence of condensations, due to the
strong force, electromagnetism, and gravity, the Universe isnow ﬁlled with protons, atoms, molecules, stars, planets,black holes, and galaxies whose densities are higher than thecurrent average density of the Universe. These condensationscan also be described as ﬁrst-order symmetry-breaking phasetransitions from a disordered higher symmetry hot phase to amore ordered lower symmetry cooler phase.
3,4To help quan-
tify the context for this sequence of transitions, we computeand plot (Fig. 1) the time dependence of the decreasing den-
sity and temperature of the Universe.
B. Changing dominant densities in the Universe
Starting with inﬂation, the dominant densities have been
the densities of the false vacuum energy of inﬂation ( X
Ki),radiation ( Xr), matter ( Xm), and ﬁnally today, vacuum energy
or dark energy ( XK). The three transitions among these four
epochs are known, respectively, as reheating, matter-
radiation equality, and the beginning of vacuum energy
domination.
The details of inﬂation are largely unknown.3,12For sim-
plicity, we assume the initial condition at the Planck time
that the Universe was at the Planck temperature and the
Planck density ( tp,Tp, and qp, respectively). We assume the
Universe underwent inﬂationary expansion13–15that ended at
the grand uniﬁed theory (GUT) scale ( t/C2410/C032s) when
reheating produced a radiation-dominated Universe with anenergy density equal to the energy density during inﬂation:q
GUT¼qKi.16Following Refs. 1and 17, we also assume
radiation domination before inﬂation. These assumptionsconstrain inﬂation to start at t/C2410
/C036s.
As the Universe expanded, the scalefactor ( a) increased.
Since the density of radiation qr/a/C04, while the density of
matter qm/a/C03, expansion led to matter-radiation equality:
qr/C24qm. After equality, the Universe became matter domi-
nated and gravity, like the other stronger forces before it,could begin to condense or accrete objects out of thebackground.
C. Relativistic degrees of freedom in the early
Universe: g
/C3
A couple of minutes after the big bang ( t/H11407102s), as the
Universe expanded and the scale factor of the Universeincreased, the average temperature of the photons ﬁlling theUniverse decreased according to Eq. (1). If we want the tem-
perature at earlier times, the more general Eq. (2)is needed.
It depends on both the scale factor and on g
/C3, the number of
relativistic degrees of freedom in thermal equilibrium with
the photons1,3,18
T¼Toa/C01fort/H11407102s; (1)
T¼Toa/C01g/C3
2/C18/C19/C01=3
; (2)
where To¼2:725 K is the temperature of the current cosmic
microwave background (CMB) photons.19Theg/C3in Eq. (2)
819 Am. J. Phys. 91(10), October 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 819 04 October 2023 22:58:11
can be thought of as a measure of the heat capacity of the hot
relativistic plasma. It is analogous to the number of degreesof freedom of a polyatomic gas. As the temperatureincreases, more vibrational and rotational degrees of freedom
become available. Energy added to the system has to be par-
titioned among the increasing number of degrees of freedom,rather than directly increasing the temperature of the system.With more degrees of freedom, the heat capacity of the gas
increases.
Similarly, as we go back in time (before t/C2410
2s) to the
increasingly high energies of the early Universe, g/C3increasesas the two degrees of freedom of photons are joined in ther-
mal equilibrium by the degrees of freedom of the increas-ingly numerous relativistic particles. Hot relativistic particles
act like massless photons since their energy, E¼ðp
2c2
þm2c4Þ1=2is dominated by their momentum and can be
well-approximated by E/C25pc. As we go back in time, get-
ting closer to the big bang, g/C3increases. Thus, we need to
replace Eq. (1)with Eq. (2), from which we can see that as
we get closer to the big bang, Tdoes not increase as fast as
/C24a/C01. In the lower panel of Fig. 1, we can see that g/C3begins
to increase for t/H11351102s. If photons are the only form of radi-
ation, Eqs. (1)and(2)are identical since g/C3¼2 (one degree
of freedom for each of the two photon spin states).
Currently, neutrinos are not in thermal equilibrium with
the 3 K photons of the cosmic microwave background. The
relativistic degrees of freedom of neutrinos are not included
in our g/C3for temperatures T/H113511010K when they are
decoupled from photons.
Similar to temperature in Eq. (2), the energy density qrof
a relativistic gas also depends on g/C3. If we only have pho-
tons, the energy density is given in Eq. (3). However, if there
are other relativistic particles in thermal equilibrium withphotons at a common temperature T, to compute their com-
bined energy density we need to multiply Eq. (3)byg
/C3=2t o
obtain the generalization Eq. (4).1,7,8Finally, using Eq. (2),
we substitute for Tin Eq. (4)and obtain Eq. (5): the energy
density in all relativistic degrees of freedom (in thermalequilibrium with photons) as a function of scale factor and
g
/C3,3,12
qr¼aBT4fort/H11407102s; (3)
qr¼aBT4g/C3
2/C18/C19
; (4)
qr¼aBTo
a/C18/C194g/C3
2/C18/C19/C01=3
; (5)
where the radiation density constant aB¼ðp2k4=15/C22h3c3Þ.3
Comparing Eqs. (2)and(5), we see that both temperature
and density have the same g/C01=3
/C3 dependence. Inserting the
g/C3of the lower panel of Fig. 1into Eqs. (2)and(5)enables
us to plot in the upper panel of Fig. 1the time dependence of
the background temperature and density during the conden-
sation of objects in the Universe.
