Interested In
Sample class on Tutorials in Introductory Physics
AIP Conference Proceedings  (March 1997)
Tutorial on vibration and sound
J Acoust Soc Am  (March 2023)
Towards Understanding Classroom Culture: Students’ Perceptions of T utorials
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2009) 04 October 2023 22:56:07
Tutorials in climate modelinga)
Lane H. Seeleyb)
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
(Received 8 November 2022; accepted 6 March 2023)
This article describes a learner-centered, tutorial-based approach to climate modeling. Using these
tutorials, students in a general education course in global climate change taught in the physics
department engaged with compelling, “real-world” questions by drawing on foundational physicsconcepts along with their prior experiences and conceptual resources in the process of knowledge
construction. Students used simulations, energy tracking diagrams, and algebraic analysis to
construct climate models that address challenging quantitative questions and reveal key concepts inclimate science. Special emphasis was given to the learning goals, pre-requisite knowledge, and
conceptual challenges associated with these activities. Instructional materials are provided for
educators who wish to adapt these tutorials for use in their own educational context. Thesupplementary materials are appropriate for both non-science majors and upper-level physics
majors.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0134144
I. INTRODUCTION
Global climate change is perhaps the single most important
scientiﬁc issue of our time. The current generation of studentswill be called upon to act decisively to limit the extent ofhuman-caused climate change. They will also be asked torespond equitably and adapt strategically to the impact of achanging climate. To meet these challenges, students should
be empowered with a basic conceptual and quantitative
understanding of the underlying physics of Earth’s changingclimate. There are many excellent educational resources thathave been designed to help students understand the physics ofEarth’s climate.
1,2This article will describe a learner-
centered, tutorial-based approach to climate science in which
students construct and adapt their own climate models. The
unit described here was developed for a physics course onglobal climate change at a small, private, liberal arts univer-sity. This course is open to students from all majors, has nopre-requisites, and uses Andrew Dessler’s Introduction to
Modern Climate Change as a primary textbook.
3In the
activities presented here, students engage with compelling,
“real-world” questions as they draw on foundational physicsconcepts along with their prior experiences and conceptualresources in the process of knowledge construction. Studentsuse simulations, energy tracking diagrams,
4and algebraic
analysis to construct climate models that address challengingquantitative questions and reveal key concepts in climate sci-
ence. Throughout this article, I will reference tutorials and
other instructional resources which are included as the supple-mentary material for instructors to adapt for their instructionalcontext.
The primary learning goals of this unit are as follows:
(1) Students learn to use simple climate models as tools to
engage with signiﬁcant questions about Earth’s changingclimate.
(2) Students recognize that climate change can be reason-
ably approximated as a shift from one state of dynamic
equilibrium to an altered state of dynamic equilibrium.
(3) Students realize that the greenhouse effect warms
Earth’s surface through absorption and emission of infra-red radiation in the atmosphere and which is essential fora habitable planet.(4) Students determine that the release of thermal energy
from fossil fuel combustion can only account for a small
fraction of the recently observed increase in global sur-face temperature.
