Interested In
Förster resonant energy transfer from an inorganic quantum well to a molecular material: Unexplored
aspects, losses, and implications to applications
J. Chem. Phys.  (December 2015)
An unexplored antipolar phase in HfO 2 from first principles and implication for wake-up mechanism
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (August 2021)
Improving machine learning force fields for molecular dynamics simulations with fine-grained force metrics
J. Chem. Phys.  (July 2023) 04 October 2023 23:04:17
Unexplored aspects of a variational principle in electrostatics
Kolahal Bhattacharyaa)
Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education (TIFR), Mumbai, India
Debapriyo Syamb)
Centre for Astroparticle Physics and Space Science, Bose Institute, Kolkata, India
(Received 15 June 2021; accepted 7 December 2021)
The electrostatic ﬁeld magnitude can play a role in a variational principle similar to the role of the index
of refraction in geometrical optics, allowing the determination of electric ﬁeld lines. This was identiﬁed
in the context of the grounded conducting sphere image problem. Assuming the knowledge of themagnitude of the electric ﬁeld, in this paper, we validate this principle for the general case and explore
some of its consequences.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0060116
I. INTRODUCTION
A variational principle constitutes one of the most power-
ful methods of physical theories. The most popular of themis, of course, Hamilton’s principle of stationary action.1In
geometrical optics, one would use Fermat’s principle2that
asserts that light rays follow the path about which the opticalpath length is stationary. Many major results of geometrical
optics can be directly derived from this principle.
One of the methods of solving boundary value problems in
electrostatics is the method of images.3Its name is perhaps
due to the apparent similarity between the image formationby a plane mirror and the placement of an image charge in the
case of an inﬁnite grounded conducting plane. Though not
widely recognized, there is a deeper similarity even in othercases, for example, the grounded conducting sphere imageproblem.
4In this case, one ﬁnds analogues of the mirror
image and object distance relations as well as magniﬁcation
formulae. This observation led to the discovery of a varia-tional principle dÐ
B
AEd s¼0 in electrostatics5like Fermat’s
principle in geometrical optics, where AandBare two ﬁxed
points lying on the same electrostatic ﬁeld line. Here, it is
assumed that the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld is known as afunction of position. Due to the conservative nature of the
ﬁeld, the integralÐ
B
AE/C1dsbetween two ﬁxed points AandB
is stationary, irrespective of the curve. However, the proposedvariational principle leads to the curve between Aand B
superimposed with the local direction of the ﬁeld.
Though this principle was originally contemplated to
explain the analogy with virtual image formation in mirror-
optics, it can have important implications. For example,recently, it has been applied to demystify the nonlocalityproblem in the Aharonov–Bohm effect
6that has resolved a
fundamental paradox of quantum physics. Even in the classi-
cal domain, there are other yet unexplored illuminatingaspects of this principle that can shed light on the propertiesof electrostatic ﬁelds. We shall discuss some of these in this
paper. We shall start by giving a proof of the variational
principle in two dimensions in Sec. 