Interested In
Using a Smartphone Pressure Sensor as Pitot T ube Speedometer
Phys. T each.  (April 2022)
Android-based physics learning media to develop students’ computational thinking skill: Literature study
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023)
Supporting Students with ADHD in Introductory Physics Courses: Four Steps for Instructors
The Physics T eacher  (October 2021) 04 October 2023 22:57:42
Why and how to implement worked examples in upper division
theoretical physics
Philipp Scheigera)
Research Group Teaching Methodology in Physics and Astronomy, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 07743
Jena, Germany and Physics Didactics Research, 5. Physikalisches Institut and Center for Integrated Quantum
Science and Technology, Universit €at Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, Stuttgart 70569, Germany
Holger Cartariusb)
Research Group Teaching Methodology in Physics and Astronomy, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 07743
Jena, Germany
Ronny Nawrodtc)
Physics Didactics Research, 5. Physikalisches Institut and Center for Integrated Quantum Science and
Technology, Universit €at Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, Stuttgart 70569, Germany
(Received 24 June 2022; accepted 26 June 2023)
Studying worked examples has been shown by extensive research to be an effective method for
learning to solve well-structured problems in physics and mathematics. The effectiveness of
learning with worked examples has been demonstrated and documented in many research projects.In this work, we propose a new four-step approach for teaching with worked examples that
includes writing explanations and ﬁnding and correcting errors. This teaching method can even be
implemented in courses in which homework performance constitutes part of the grading system.This four-step approach is illustrated in the context of Lagrangian mechanics, which is ideal for the
application of worked examples due to its universal approach to solve problems.
#2023 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0105612
I. INTRODUCTION
Worked examples are step-by-step solutions of exercises or
tasks. When well-structured worked examples are included inthe learning process of novices, they improve the initial acquisi-
tion of cognitive skills as compared to conventional problem-
solving activities (the so-called worked-example effect).1–3
Effective learning with worked examples can consist, for exam-ple, of studying several solutions and explaining them oneself
before solving a similar problem without add itional support
(example-problem pairs1).
The advantages of this method are often understood through
cognitive load theory.3This theory assumes that learning is
associated with cognitive load and describes what can facilitate
or impede learning. For example, the removal of extraneoustasks such as remembering how to complete mathematical
operations allows the student to concentrate on the main learn-
ing task. In addition, worked examples are considered cognitiveactivating, meaning that they cause the student to focus atten-
tion on the most important learning tasks (for an overview, see
Refs. 3–5). Learning with worked examples can be more effec-
tive than to conventional problem solving because when learn-ers are presented with a new topic, they often concentrate
cognitive resources on the technical aspects of solving the prob-
lem. In that case, less resources are available for the construc-tion of abstract schemata, which lead to transfer and can help to
solve related problems (cf. Ref. 6). The effectiveness of such a
worked example effect is well examined and proven in well-structured areas of mathematics and physics,
3,7–12a n da l s oi n
text comprehension,13and essay writing.14
However, worked examples are not always superior or
more efﬁcient in learning in comparison to classical problemsolving.15They need to be structured and designed in a way
that extraneous load is decreased and germane load is
increased such that learners proﬁt from them. For example,self-explanations by students turn out to be important.16Therequest for self-explanations (and also ﬁnding or ﬁxing
errors17,18) in our approach is an important difference from
the simple presentation of solved problems in lectures.
The added value of worked examples has also been dem-
onstrated for double integrals in calculus at university
level,19i.e., in a topic which is needed regularly in theoreti-
cal physics. Therefore, worked examples are a promisingtool for improving teaching in upper-division theoreticalphysics. They can be used as further methodical variation (in
addition to, e.g., peer instruction and small group tutorials)
for the transformation of upper-division physics courses
20–23
or to help students to overcome typical difﬁculties withmathematical tools.24–26
In addition to example-problem pairs (the simplest and most
often recommended scheme of worked examples1,11), other
approaches with additional intermediate tasks can be beneﬁ-
cial27such as including self-explanation prompts and succes-
sively removing more and more worked-out tasks in solutions.It is the purpose of this work to show that a four-step approachbased on worked examples can indeed be introduced in theoret-
ical physics. In Sec. 