Interested In
Kinetic theory of vehicular traf fic
Am. J. Phys.  (February 2016)
Vehicular camera pedestrian detection research
AIP Conference Proceedings  (March 2018)
Modeling vehicular speed fluctuations as a stochastic process with exponentially decaying memory
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2020) 04 October 2023 23:16:34
Black-hole analog in vehicular traffic
Luanna K. de Souzaa)and George E. A. Matsasb)
Instituto de F /C19ısica Te /C19orica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rua Dr. Bento Teobaldo Ferraz, 271, 01140-070,
S~ao Paulo, SP, Brazil
(Received 18 March 2022; accepted 24 July 2022)
We propose here a simple black-hole analog in vehicular-trafﬁc dynamics. The corresponding
causal diagram is determined by the propagation of the tail light ﬂashes emitted by a convoy of
cars on a highway. In addition to being a new black-hole analog, this illustrates how causaldiagrams, so common in general relativity, may be useful in areas as unexpected as vehicular-
trafﬁc dynamics.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0091957
I. INTRODUCTION
The area of analog models of gravitational systems has a
splendid history. Its genesis can be traced back to the begin-
ning of the 1980s with two independent papers: one byVincent Moncrief1and the other by Bill Unruh.2Moncrief
considered a perturbed ﬂuid in a general relativistic space-
time and concluded that one can study the stability of spheri-
cal accretion onto nonrotating stars by the methods used for
black holes , while Unruh2showed that the perturbation of
usual nonrelativistic irrotational ﬂuids develops sonic hori-
zons, which emit sound waves with a thermal spectrum anal-ogous to the radiation derived by Hawking for usual black
holes.3After that, various analog black holes were discov-
ered in Bose–Einstein condensates, shallow water waves,
slow light, and so on (see Refs. 4and5for reviews of analog
models of gravity). Our vehicular-trafﬁc black hole adds a
new and appealingly simple model to this list.
We propose a simple black-hole analog in vehicular-
trafﬁc dynamics. The corresponding causal diagram is deter-
mined by the propagation of the tail light ﬂashes emitted by
a convoy of cars on a straight highway. Similar to a realblack hole, our vehicular-trafﬁc black-hole model exhibits
event and apparent horizons and a Planck region where the
causal structure breaks down. This model also illustrates
how (informational) causal diagrams, so common in general
relativity, may be useful in areas as unexpected as vehicular-
trafﬁc dynamics. It is possible that this simple physical-
informational approach, complemented by more traditionalones,
6could help to avoid trafﬁc accidents under impaired
visibility conditions. If this occurs, it would constitute a quite
curious relativity spin-off.
This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. 