Infinite-fold energy degeneracy in 2D square lattices of
magnetic spheres 
Kyongwan Kim  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 603–612 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0121937
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Interdimensional degeneracies, near degeneracies, and their applications
J. Chem. Phys.  (October 1986)
Dissipation driven degeneracies
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (December 2022)
Degeneracy and long-range correlations
Chaos  (October 2013) 04 October 2023 22:54:45
Infinite-fold energy degeneracy in 2D square lattices of magnetic
spheres
Kyongwan Kima)
Department of Physics, Dankook University, Cheonan 31116, South Korea
(Received 21 August 2022; accepted 22 May 2023)
We show that a two-dimensional square lattice of magnets can be studied by placing small
cylindrical neodymium magnets inside plastic spherical shells and ﬂoating them on water, leavingtheir magnetic moments free to re-orient within the plane. Experimentally, anti-correlated dipole
orientations between nearest neighbors appear to be favored energetically. This motivates the
construction of a simpliﬁed single-variable energy function for a 2D square lattice of magneticdipoles. For odd numbers of spheres, this ansatz yields a continuum of dipole conﬁgurations with
the same energies, matching the observed behavior that the orientation of the dipoles in these
lattices can be rotated freely. The behavior of square lattices with even numbers of spheres isstrikingly different, showing strongly preferred orientations. While the energy calculated in this
simpliﬁed model is larger than that of the actual ground state for ﬁnite size clusters, its asymptotic
value in the limit where the number of spheres goes to inﬁnity is in good agreement with theliterature value. Additionally, rectangular arrangements of magnetic spheres with and without a
defect are analyzed within the class of the single variable energy function. Simple experimental
demonstrations qualitatively reproduce several interesting results obtained from all these analyses.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0121937
I. INTRODUCTION
Observing a pattern emerging from a many-body system
is exciting for both students and professional researchers.
Understanding this pattern requires making connections
between the large-scale behavior and the interactions among
system elements. A simple and appealing system in which
these effects can be observed and understood is an array of
permanent magnets. Permanent magnets—while themselves
having properties that are due to these many-body effects—
can also be used to study many-body effects due to the long-
range interaction between magnetic dipoles. Spherical neo-
dymium magnets are commercially available and have been
used without any modiﬁcation for the study of energetically
favorable magnetic assemblages,1–4self-assembly dynam-
ics,5and mechanical properties of assemblages.6,7These
magnets have also been incorporated into larger structures
including 3D polymeric spheres8and cork disks9in order to
study self-assembly.
In this work, we use a new type of magnetic object that
allows us to focus on the dipole interactions between mag-
nets in a two-dimensional cluster. It is a plastic spherical
shell with a small cylindrical or spherical neodymium mag-
net at its center. These shells are needed, because the mag-
netic force between bare neodymium magnets is quite
strong. When the bare magnets aggregate into a chain, it is
very difﬁcult to twist one of the magnets and see its effect on
the orientation of the others, since the chain tends to deform
in response to the large twisting force. However, such an
observation is crucial to understand the connection between
global properties of a magnetic system and the features of
local interactions among its constituent dipoles. Our compos-
ite magnetic object allows these studies, because the plastic
shell keeps the magnets separated, decreasing the magnetic
force. Thus, our magnetic spheres have rotational freedom
even when they are formed into a spatially tight aggregate.
Moreover, the spheres ﬂoat in water since their volumes aremostly made up of the air. Simply by tossing these magnetic
spheres into a water tank, one can create a 2D magnetic layer
at the air–water interface. Finally, even if it is an emptysphere with a tiny cylindrical magnet at the center, we can
regard it not only as a point-like magnetic dipole approxi-
mately but also as a uniformly magnetized spherical object
effectively.10In the following, we describe our ﬁndings from
straightforward experiments using these novel objects as
well as numerical studies to model their behavior.
