INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| JUNE 01 2023
Cost-effective measurement of magnetostriction in
nanoscale thin films through an optical cantilever
displacement method 
David L. T ran; Paymon Shirazi ; Mohanchandra K. Panduranga ; Gregory P . Carman
Am. J. Phys.  91, 470 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0134187
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Parameter space validation through OOPS simulations of plasma burnthrough and discharge evolution in
the SST -1 tokamak
Phys. Plasmas  (April 2020)
Micro-magnetoelastic modeling of T erfenol-D for spintronics
J. Appl. Phys.  (June 2022)
Correlation between bonding, vacancy migration mechanisms, and creep in model binary and ternary hcp-
Mg solid solutions
J. Appl. Phys.  (October 2020) 04 October 2023 22:53:02
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
Cost-effective measurement of magnetostriction in nanoscale thin films
through an optical cantilever displacement method
David L. Tran,a)Paymon Shirazi,b)Mohanchandra K. Panduranga,c)
and Gregory P . Carmand)
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90095
(Received 8 November 2022; accepted 15 March 2023)
A cost-effective method for the quantitative characterization of the magnetostrictive effect in thin ﬁlms
is presented. In this method, a sample’s magnetostriction is extrapolated from the tip displ acement of a
thin-ﬁlm magnetostrictive cantilever. The tip displacement is measured by monitoring the position of a
reﬂected laser beam using two differentially coupled photodiode positioning sensors. In contrast withalternative optical deﬂection-angle devices designed for educational purposes, the detection limit of
our setup resolves submicron-level displacements from nanoscale thin ﬁlms. The efﬁcacy of the system
is demonstrated through measurements using amorphous 200-nm thick Terfenol-D/Si (100) bimorphcantilevers. In these measurements, magnetostriction values of 106 63:5 ppm at 64300 Oe applied
ﬁeld were attained, where the voltage noise ﬂoor was 60.05 V (a cantilever displacement uncertainty
of670 nm). In-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OOP) magnetization curves and crystallographic x-ray
diffraction (XRD) were performed to determine the magnetic behavior and conﬁrm the amorphous
nature of the ﬁlms, respectively. The experimental methods and material characterization systems
demonstrated here enhance the understanding of complex magnetic phenomena and introduce commonmeasurement techniques to better equip students with the skills for insightful analysis of fundamental
magnetic physics.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0134187
I. INTRODUCTION
The precise measurement of the magnetostrictive effect in
thin ﬁlm materials is a complex task and is often the subject
of magnetics education. Magnetostriction is an inherent prop-erty of ferromagnetic and ferrimagnetic materials anddescribes the change in a sample’s dimensions upon applica-
tion of a magnetic ﬁeld H, which enables the conversion of
electromagnetic energy to mechanical energy or vice versa.This applied Hwill cause magnetic domains—regions of
aligned spins and orbitals of unpaired electrons—most closely
aligned with the direction of Hto accumulate over domains
oriented in different directions. Accordingly, the dipoleswithin these differently oriented domains will experience atorque from Hand rotate to align themselves with this ﬁeld.
Rotations result in an induced strain as the spacing between
atoms must change to accompany the realignment of the orbi-tals in the presence of spin-orbit coupling.
1,2Depending on its
sign, the magnetostrictive strain kmsincreases or decreases
until it levels off towards a saturation value ksat. This effect
has been exploited for sensory and actuation purposes foundin milling process monitoring,3high-accuracy position sen-
sors,4linear motors,5among other applications.
Since its discovery in 1842, numerous methods have been
devised to directly measure magnetostriction as a function of
the strength of the applied magnetic ﬁeld H, including strain
gauges,6laser Doppler/holographic interferometry,7,8and
deﬂection-angle devices.9–11Strain gauges offer an accurate
and cost-effective approach commonly used for bulk crystal-line materials, but cannot be applied to thin ﬁlms due totheir signiﬁcantly reduced dimensions ( <1lm) and micro/
nanoscale displacements.
1Interferometry uses the superposi-
tion of interfering waves between the sample and a referencemirror to extract information about either phase or amplitudechanges. These apparatuses offer incredible precision, but
are meticulous to implement, expensive (especially for edu-
cational demonstrations), and highly sensitive due to theoptics required.
8Instead, an alternative method to cost effec-
tively and accurately measure the magnetostrictive effect isthrough the deﬂection method,12wherein the displacement
of a reﬂected laser beam from the sample is read via a posi-tioning sensor or camera. With these systems, calibration
470 Am. J. Phys. 91(6), June 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 470 04 October 2023 22:53:02
and further data processing are required to properly assess
equipment sensitivity constants (e.g., the apparatus’ camera
constant K; see discussion below) but offer substantially more
cost-effectiveness and less complexity than interferometry-based techniques. Previous cantilever-based setups incorpo-rating the deﬂection angle approach and designed for
classroom purposes have demonstrated accurate measure-
ments for ﬁlm thicknesses t
fin the range of tens of lm.9,10
The new setup described in this paper is ideal for educational
purposes as it is suitable for nanoscale thin ﬁlms with tfin the
hundreds of nm deposited in a number of ways—sputtering,
evaporation, or molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE)—and has amuch lower detection limit k
DLfor a variety of bimorph canti-
lever proportions than similar setups suggested by Laumann
et al.9and Adhikari et al.10Furthermore, even though similar
apparatuses exist using voltage measurements, they are need-lessly complex to set up, require a complex array of beam
splitters and mirrors,11and ultimately distract from the heart
of the experiment, despite their accuracy. On the other hand,the beneﬁts associated with the versatility of our system, easeof set up and operation through educationally available free
software (e.g., the entire experimental procedure can easily be
automated in MATLAB ,Python , or similar programs), and
capability to measure magnetostriction of a variety of ﬁlmsfrom nanoscale to bulk thickness are promising for general
laboratory and educational purposes.
This article outlines our cost-effective magnetostriction
measurement apparatus with nanoscale precision designed foreducational purposes. In Sec. 