Interested In
Gravitational waves physics using Fermi coordinates: A new teaching perspective
Am. J. Phys.  (June 2021)
Hidden mechanical momentum and the field momentum in stationary electromagnetic and gravitational
systems
American Journal of Physics  (June 1997)
Non-machian, Lorentz-invariant inertia: The first step towards the theory of GravitoElectroMagnetism
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 1999) 04 October 2023 23:10:12
Gravitoelectromagnetism: Removing action-at-a-distance
in teaching physics
Friedrich Herrmanna)and Michael Pohligb)
Abteilung f €ur Didaktik der Physik, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
(Received 21 March 2021; accepted 7 March 2022)
Gravitation is still taught largely in a way that suggests the existence of action-at-a-distance. A theory
without such shortcomings, gravitoelectromagnetism, was proposed by Heaviside in 1893, but it didnot become well-established because many effects it describes are very small and the later emergence
of general relativity seemed to make a theory of gravitoelectromagnetism superﬂuous. We argue
that gravitoelectromagnetism still retains relevance in the physics curriculum because it by nomeans describes only tiny effects and does not demand the mathematical level of general relativity.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009888
I. INTRODUCTION
Anyone teaching gravity who does not wish to invoke
general relativity does so in essentially the way Newton for-
mulated it. Newtonian mechanics originated at a time when
there was no concept of physical ﬁelds and one had to be sat-isﬁed with invoking action-at-a-distance. Similarly, Newtondid not say anything about energy for it did not yet exist as a
physical quantity, and even after it was introduced, it could
not be localized; that is, it was not possible to specify anenergy density and an energy current density until about theend of the 19th century (Ref. 1, pp. 1180–1181). Even today,
the language of energy still retains the ﬁngerprints of its
action-at-a-distance origins: If a body is lifted, we say thatthe potential energy of the body increases, knowing full well
that this energy is not stored within the body.
2We can cir-
cumvent action-at-a-distance by speaking of a “gravitationalﬁeld,” but this leaves unanswered questions as to its energycontent, mechanical stress, and how the energy ﬂows within
the ﬁeld. One does not typically discuss, for example, the
energy density of the ﬁeld or what path the energy takesfrom the ﬁeld to a falling body.
The later development of the ﬁeld concept by Faraday and
Maxwell in the theory of Electromagnetism (EM) could have
served as a model for a more modern theory of gravitation.
Such a theory, Gravitoelectromagnetism (GEM), was in factformulated by Heaviside and is structured in close analogy
to Maxwell’s theory.
3GEM closes the gap between
Newtonian mechanics and general relativity. Like EM invacuum, GEM operates with two ﬁeld strengths. One ofthem is the gravitational ﬁeld strength g, which is also called
the gravistatic ﬁeld strength and whose source is the mass
density; this is analogous to the electric ﬁeld strength E,
whose source is the electric charge density. The other is thegravinetic ﬁeld strength b, whose source is the mass current
density; this is analogous to the magnetic B-ﬁeld, whose
source is the electric current density. We have adopted theterms gravistatic and gravinetic from Krumm and Bedford.
4
While it is common to introduce gwhen treating gravita-
tion, the gravinetic ﬁeld strength bis not usually mentioned
because its effects are typically miniscule. As an example,we consider the rotating Earth, which generates a b-ﬁeld and
thus exerts a force on, say, an airplane. If we assume that an
aircraft of 400 tonnes ð400 000 kg Þis ﬂying at 1000 km =h
due east at the equator, this results in a “gravitationalLorentz force” of about 1 lN; that is, the aircraft effectivelybecomes about 0 :1 mg lighter. This calculation is detailed in
Appendix A .
In our opinion, the smallness of GEM effects should not
be an argument against introducing students to b.T h e
action of the gravitational Lorentz force is an interesting
phenomenon and gives us a better understanding of gravita-
tion by revealing an analogy. A more important reason to
introduce bis that it is a factor in the energy current density
of the gravitational ﬁeld, and here, its effect is not at all
tiny. The reason for this is that while benters quadratically
into the forces (i.e., the momentum currents), it enters linearly
into the energy current. Thus, we believe that GEM still has
merit today and that it deserves a place in the pedagogical cur-riculum. Several other authors have advocated this as well;
see, for example, Refs. 4(p. 362), 5(p. 889), and 6(p. 422).
In Sec. 