Interested In
There might be two kinds of dibaryon
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 1995)
Why quantum mechanics might be wrong
Pulsating x ‐ ray source might be neutron star or black hole
Physics T oday  (June 1971) 04 October 2023 23:12:38
Resources-oriented instruction: What does it mean, and what might
it look like?
Amy D. Robertsona)
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
Lauren C. Bauman
Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195
Yohannes M. Abraham
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
Brynna Hansen
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
Hung Tran
School of STEM, University of Washington, Bothell, Washington 98011
Lisa M. Goodhew
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
(Received 31 March 2021; accepted 26 February 2022)
Resources-oriented instruction in physics treats student thinking as sensible and then seeks to
connect what students are saying and doing to physics content and practices. This paper uses anillustrative case to make progress toward answering the instructional questions: “What does
resources-oriented instruction in physics look like?” and “How can I do it?”. We analyze an
interaction between a university TA and a group of four introductory physics students completing aworksheet about mechanical wave propagation. We show some of the ways in which the TA’s
instructional moves supported students in making conceptual progress, even though several of the
students’ ideas would not be accepted as correct by many physicists.
#2022 Published under an exclusive
license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009796
I. INTRODUCTION
The resources theoretical framework1–4emerged in the
early 1990s, alongside and in conversation with misconcep-tions research.
5–7Whereas misconception research focused
on student ideas that were incorrect, positioning these ideasasbarriers to learning, resources theory framed student
thinking as fundamentally sensible and as including “seeds”or “beginnings” of formal physics reasoning, and thus inte-
gral to student learning.
In physics education research (PER), early misconcep-
tions- and difﬁculties-oriented work focused on identifyingstudent misunderstandings about a variety of physics topics
and on developing instructional materials that address the
misunderstandings identiﬁed (e.g., Refs. 8and 9). Early
resources research focused on illustrating theory with case
studies, showing, for example, that student thinking is
context-dependent and that students have conceptual and
epistemological resources for understanding physics.
3,10,11
This paper draws on resources theory to build instructor
awareness around a pragmatic instructional question, one
that is often asked of researchers doing resources theory
work in PER and one that has not yet been extensively
explored in physics.12That is: “What does resources-
oriented instruction look like?” and “How can I do it?” By
resources-oriented instruction, we mean instruction thattakes up the orientation toward student ideas reﬂected in the
resources framework. Resources-oriented instruction in
physics treats student thinking as sensible and then seeks tobuild bridges between what students are saying and physics
content and practices. It often relies on the assumptions thatstudents have good ideas and that students can make concep-
tual and epistemological progress on the basis of what they
already know and are doing, even if their ideas would not be
considered correct by many physicists.
13–15
In this paper, we use a case of resources-oriented instruc-
tion from an introductory physics course at a large university
to illustrate what this kind of instruction looks like, including
what kinds of instructional moves support it. We chose thiscase not only because it exempliﬁes what we think of as
resources-oriented instruction but also because it addresses
some of the concerns that we hear when we talk to instruc-
tors who are enthusiastic about resources-oriented instruction
but worried about their students’ learning.16For example,
instructors may ask, “What if students bring in incorrect
ideas? I care about my students arriving at correct physics
understandings.” Or in imagining resources-oriented instruc-
tion, they may think it is the job of the instructor to afﬁrm
every idea they hear, equally, in ways that don’t clearly draw
on their physics expertise.
The analysis in this paper responds to these concerns. The
focal episode shows students making conceptual progress in
their understanding of mechanical wave propagation. Thestudents’ TA afﬁrmed and built on students’ thinking—
including incorrect physics ideas—in ways that supported
this conceptual progress. We analyze the episode in detail in
Sec. 