Ising model 
Yannick Meurice
Am. J. Phys.  90, 87–92 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0006525
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
The ef fectiveness of aviation vocational engineering education internship-taking National Formosa
University Aeronautical Engineering as an example
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023)
Graphic arts in Ho Chi Minh City since the period 1986 to present
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 2021) 04 October 2023 23:01:17
Making digital aquatint with the Ising model
Y annick Meuricea)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242
(Received 31 January 2021; accepted 13 September 2021)
Aquatint is a printmaking technique that gives visual texture to prints. This patterning is shown to
be similar to patterns that emerge from the Ising model of magnetism. We provide a concretePython-based example that generates semi-realistic textures and can be used to manipulate existing
images. Our experience in classrooms of ﬁrst year seminar undergraduate students shows that this
activity helps artistically inclined students to develop an interest in physics and computer science.
It may also be suitable for a joint art and science project for high-school seniors.
#2022 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006525
I. INTRODUCTION
The statistical features of images or image sets are very
interesting. High resolution black and white digital pictures
of prints can capture many aspects of the original image and
encode the information into a collection of pixels havinggray values between 0 and 255. Conversely, visual aspects ofstatistical data can play an important role in identifying keyfeatures in samples. Can we use concepts and models of sta-
tistical mechanics to reproduce artistic features of images
and attempt to quantify variations observed in these images?For instance, in visual arts like printmaking, the concept oftexture plays a crucial role in the creative process and in the
description of existing prints. It is not easy to deﬁne texturein a scientiﬁc manner, but in casual conversations, print-
makers sometimes talk about the texture as the way the
printed surface would feel to the touch and they use quali-ﬁers such as rough, grainy, or smooth. Is it possible to inventstatistical mechanics models that approximately reproducesuch features? In order to simplify the discussion, we will
assume that in the ﬁrst approximation, the pixels are either
black or white and carry only one bit of information. Thissimpliﬁed approach suggests that the Ising model
1could be
used to reproduce textures achieved in printmaking ormanipulate features of existing images.
The Ising model is a highly simpliﬁed model of ferromag-
netism. It consists of “spin variables” r
xthat only take the
values61 and are located on the sites xof a lattice. The
physical meaning of the spin variables is discussed in moredetail below. In the following, we only consider lattices thatcan be built by assembling elementary squares of identicalsize in rectangular arrays because of their clear connection to
pixelated pictures. Similar constructions are possible for tri-
angular, hexagonal or higher-dimensional lattices. We canvisualize a particular choice of spin values as a collection ofblack or white pixels assembled in a two-dimensional rectan-gular array. We call this collection a conﬁguration. In this
representation, the sites of the lattice are the coordinates of
the center of the pixels. An example using a 50 /C250 lattice
is displayed in Fig. 1(a). The black pixels represent r¼þ1
(spin up) and the white pixels r¼/C01 (spin down).
In modeling physical systems, the spin variables represent
magnetic dipole moments or the intrinsic spins of electrons
and are often depicted as arrows pointing up or down. The
Ising model is a statistical model where the spin conﬁgura-tions have a classical Boltzmann probability distribution,which depends on the temperature and an external magneticﬁeld and involves nearest neighbor interactions that correlate
spins in the distribution. The temperature controls theamount of disorder appearing in the system while the mag-netic ﬁeld is used to introduce order. At low temperature,domains, which can be visualized as “islands” of spins hav-
ing the same sign, are more likely to appear. As we increase
the temperature, these domains tend to break into smallerones. At high temperature, neighboring spins become uncor-related, as in Fig. 1(a). This intuitive description of the effect
of the temperature will be made more quantitative later.
In Fig. 1(a), the individual pixels (spins) are still quite
visible. However, if we increase the number of pixels while
keeping the size of the image constant, and introduce a mag-netic ﬁeld and a temperature, textures that artists may considerinteresting can be generated. An example is shown inFig.1(b). In this example, a uniform positive magnetic ﬁeld
has been applied. This favors black pixels (spin up) over white
pixels (spin down). This procedure can be reﬁned by adding aspatially modulated magnetic ﬁeld to generate a recognizableimage. This will help us to address the question of the textureof pixelated images in the framework of the Ising model.
In the following, we show that it is possible to tune the
adjustable parameters (temperature and magnetic ﬁeld) of
the Ising model, and use a statistical method called impor-tance sampling, to generate conﬁgurations with texturesapproximating those obtained with a printmaking techniquecalled aquatint, which was developed by artists including
Francisco Goya, Pablo Picasso, and Mauricio Lasansky. A
speciﬁc print of Goya is discussed in Sec. 