Interested In
Advances in large scale laser paint stripping
ICALEO
Polygon scanner for laser paint stripping
PICALO
Virtual painting
AIP Conf. Proc.  (August 2023) 04 October 2023 23:14:22
Painting in polarization
Aaron D. Slepkova)
Physics & Astronomy, Trent University, Peterborough, Ontario K9L 0G2, Canada
(Received 9 February 2022; accepted 15 June 2022)
The array of colors and patterns seen when birefringent materials are inserted between polarizers is
a source of amusement, popular science demonstrations, and art. This phenomenon of polarization-ﬁltered coloration is commonly but misleadingly referred to as “interference colors,” despite not
arising from the effects of interference. In this work, I clarify the link between polarization ﬁltering
and the observed colors and demonstrate how various aspects of birefringence in common
household ﬁlms provide opportunities and challenges for their use in art.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0087800
I. INTRODUCTION
The array of patterned colors that can arise when birefrin-
gent materials are sandwiched between linear polarizers has
been appreciated both for beauty and usefulness for as long
as polarized light has been produced.1–3In fact, it has
become commonplace for optics textbooks to include photo-graphs of colorful arrangements of cellophane tape, stressedglass, or plastic utensils as an introductory visual illustration
of birefringence.
4Beyond aesthetic attributes, the phenome-
non has found long-standing use in various technical ﬁelds.For example, minute anisotropies in annealed glass can giverise to local “stress-induced” birefringence that can be visu-alized in polarized light,
5and glassblowers commonly use
the technique to reveal unseen internal stress near cooled
joints. Since the early 1830s, geologists and mineralogists
have developed a framework for using the patterns and col-ors that arise in a polarization microscope to identify mineralsamples.
6The Michel-L /C19evy interference color chart is
widely used by geologists to match observed color to sample
thickness, orientation, and birefringence.7
Inspired both by challenge and opportunity, artists have
sought to move beyond random patterning and colorationdisplayed by everyday birefringent objects to create deliber-ately constructed vividly colored images using this phenom-enon. Undoubtedly, the artist best known for this is Austine
Wood Comarow (1942–2020).
8Austine pioneered the art of
the polarization collage, or “polage,” as it has come to beknown.9Using sophisticated layering of cut cellophane and
other birefringent polymer ﬁlms, interspersed with layers ofﬁlm polarizers, Austine created a wide array of works, rang-ing from small standalone pieces that ﬁt on a shelf, to mas-
sive career-spanning installations in institutions such as the
Disney Epcot Center in Florida (in 1981) and theGyeongsangnam-do Institute of Science Education in Korea(in 2017).
10Austine’s early attempts at deterministic local-
ized control of birefringence-borne colors presaged full-
color liquid crystal display (LCD) technology. Indeed, the
careful control of electrically induced birefringence inmicroscopic elements of liquid crystals sandwiched betweencrossed-polarizers is the principal operating mechanism forthe LCD displays in computer monitors, laptops, tablets, and
cellphones.
11
This paper aims to clarify the underlying physical process
that gives rise to colors seen in birefringent samples whenobserved through polarizers, especially in the context of artand educational demonstrations. Through examples thatincorporate common everyday polarization and birefringent
materials, I provide insight into the basic physical attributes of
these colored structures, including the dramatic effects ofthickness variation on perceived colors and the non-intuitive
effects of layer addition. This updated and physically minded
review of the phenomenon should prove useful to science edu-cators, students, and artists alike, providing a foundation for
understanding the observed colors from a spectral standpoint.
