Inharmonicity in plucked guitar strings 
Chris J. Murray ; Scott B. Whitfield
Am. J. Phys.  90, 487–493 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0064373
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
An experimental analysis of a vibrating guitar string using high-speed photography
Am. J. Phys.  (February 2014)
Sitar spectrum properties
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005)
Generation of partials due to nonlinear mixing in a stringed instrument
J Acoust Soc Am  (January 1999) 04 October 2023 23:11:36
Inharmonicity in plucked guitar strings
Chris J. Murray and Scott B. Whitfielda)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, Eau Claire, Wisconsin 54702
(Received 22 July 2021; accepted 20 March 2022)
We have considered the vibration of various types of pinned guitar strings and have investigated
the deviation of the partials from integer multiples of the string’s fundamental vibration frequency.We measured the inharmonicity parameter Band compared it to a direct calculation based on a
model equation. We generally found very good agreement between the two determinations of Bfor
monoﬁlament strings, but perhaps not surprisingly, we ﬁnd rather poor agreement for wound
strings. Furthermore, we show that the methodology used to carry out this experiment can easily
serve as the basis for an upper division physics laboratory on physical acoustics including a morethorough investigation of the classical wave equation in a real-world application.
#2022 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0064373
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the fundamental equations one generally learns in
the ﬁrst year of University Physics is the relationship
between the harmonics present in a musical instrument and
the fundamental frequency one hears when the instrumentsounds a particular pitch. For any quasi-one-dimensionalinstrument like strings, horns, and woodwinds, the simplest
analysis yields the relationship
f
n¼nf1: (1)
Here, fnis the frequency of the nth harmonic, f1the fre-
quency of the ﬁrst harmonic or fundamental, and nthe har-
monic number, an integer greater than or equal to 1. Thevariation of the amplitudes of these harmonics goes a long
way to explaining the timbre of any musical instrument.1Of
course, this simple result, which is derived for strings (andopen and closed pipes), completely ignores the role of the
material composition of the string itself.
Equation (1)also follows more formally by solving the
classical wave equation2for a transverse wave on a string,
T@2yðx;tÞ
@x2¼l@2yðx;tÞ
@t2; (2)
where Tis the tension in the string and lthe string’s mass
per unit length. The function y(x,t) represents the vertical
displacement of a horizontal string at position xalong its
length Lat time t. The solutions to this equation yield the
speed of the transverse wave on the string v¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
T=lp
, which
can also be obtained from more elementary means, e.g., by
applying Newton’s laws to a small element of the string.
For those who have taken the time to look more carefully
into physical accoustics, it is well known that the harmonicsin an actual string, be it on a guitar or in a piano, are sharp:
they lie higher in frequency compared to what is predicted
by Eq. (1). In fact, the presence of this inharmonicity is cru-
cial to the tuning of pianos as it becomes necessary to stretchthe octaves. For example, the note for C5 will be tuned
higher than the standard pitch to align with the slightly sharp
harmonics of C3.
3Here, C3 refers to the third occurrence of
a C on a piano keyboard, and C5 to the ﬁfth. In the western
musical tradition of 12 notes per octave, there is about a 6%
difference in the ratio of adjacent frequencies, e.g., B to C, Cto C#, etc. Inharmonicities can be 1.5% or more on an
upright piano.2This is easily detected by the human ear,
which can generally detect frequency differences as low as0.5%–0.6%.3Hence, inharmonicity of only a percent or less
can be musically signiﬁcant, whether in a piano or in anotherinstrument.
The origin of this inharmonicity in strings was ﬁrst recog-
nized by Rayleigh,4and discussed fully in Refs. 2,5, and 6.
To account for the inherent stiffness of the vibrating string,an additional term should be added to Eq. (2). This term
appears when considering the string as a thin uniform rigidrod undergoing transverse oscillations.
2This results in a new
wave equation,
T@2yðx;tÞ
@x2/C0YSk2@4yðx;tÞ
@x4¼l@2yðx;tÞ
@t2: (3)
Here, Yis Young’s modulus of elasticity, Sthe cross-
sectional area of the string, and kits radius of gyration. The
radius of gyration is related to the moment of inertia, I, and
is an alternative way to describe the rotation of an object ofmass maround a particular axis ( k¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
I=mp
). A taut string
can be pinned, in which case it is supported in two places by
a “knife edge” (e.g., the guitar bridge and nut), or clamped if
the top and bottom of each end of the string are secured byan additional structure which could encase the string. Theboundary conditions are different in each case. For pinnedstrings ð@
2yðx;tÞÞ=@x2¼0, while for clamped strings
@yðx;tÞ=@x¼0.6In the case of pinned strings, the solution
to Eq. (3)yields a modiﬁcation to Eq. (1),2,5–7
fn¼nf0ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þBn2p
: (4)
Here, Bis the inharmonicity parameter and f0is the fre-
quency of the fundamental in the absence of any inharmonic-ity, i.e., for B¼0. Note that for n¼1, the new fundamental
will be slightly sharper compared to the fundamental fre-quency when there is no inharmonicity. In fact, it is clearthat all of the new harmonics, partials, will be slightly sharp
compared to the corresponding harmonics for a string with
no internal stiffness, Eq. (1). The explicit form of Bobtained
by solving Eq. (3)for a pinned string, see the Appendix ,i s
B¼
p2YSk2
TL2: (5)
487 Am. J. Phys. 90(7), July 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 487 04 October 2023 23:11:36
This equation can be put in a simpler form by using the
fact that the radius of gyration is related to the radius rof the
string by k¼r=26andS¼pr2. This leads to
B¼p3Yr4
4TL2: (6)
Investigations of Eqs. (4)and(6)lend themselves very nicely
to an upper division undergraduate laboratory, which can be
developed using equipment commonly found in most under-
graduate physics laboratories or purchased for a minimal
cost. In addition, such a lab can be a springboard for a more
detailed theoretical discussion of the classical wave equation(Eq. (2)) and the extent to which the simple formula f
n¼nf1
breaks down in real-world cases. Furthermore, the level of
math needed to solve Eq. (3)is appropriate to both junior
and senior physics majors who have had a general differen-
tial equations course. In summary, this particular experiment
is an ideal pedagogical tool for the undergraduate physics
curriculum.
A robust investigation of the inharmonicities in monoﬁla-
ment and wound piano strings was carried out by Fletcher.6
A monoﬁlament string is composed of a single uniform
material. This is the case for which Eq. (3)is strictly valid.
Wound strings typically have a different material wrapped
around a uniform core. This will decrease the fundamental
frequency of the string by increasing its mass without signiﬁ-
cantly increasing its stiffness. The case of a piano is more
complicated than that of a guitar, as the boundary conditions
imposed on the strings are a mixture of both pinned and
clamped strings. In the case of clamped strings, Eq. (4)is no
longer valid and must be multiplied by an additional termwhich also depends on B.6Fletcher investigated both cases
and found that, for pinned boundary conditions, Bcalculated
using Eq. (5)generally gave better agreement with the mea-
sured values of B(found from Eq. (4)) than did the clamped
case. No rigorous error analysis was carried out in either
case. The agreement was very good for monoﬁlament
strings, which is an inherent assumption leading to the new
term in Eq. (3). For wound strings, for which Eq. (6)is not
strictly valid, he devised an ad hoc model that accounted for
the winding around a monoﬁlament core. He found his
model to give a good approximation to Bfor wound strings,
but not as good as in the case of monoﬁlament strings.
Since the pioneering work of Fletcher, there have been
more recent investigations of inharmonicity in piano strings
and wound strings in general,8–10as well as a detailed investi-
gation of the inharmonicity in bass guitar strings involving
variable density of the strings and the effect of fret pinning.11
Previous research has also focused on the psychoacoustic
effects of inharmonicity in guitar strings. Indeed, the form of
the guitar lends itself to high levels of inharmonicity. Therelatively short length of the strings and their low tension,
relative to an instrument like a piano, results in a level of
inharmonicity great enough to be perceptible to a listener.
J€arvel €ainen and Karjalainen12devised experiments to assess
the perception of inharmonicity for steel and nylon stringed
guitars. Recordings were used to create a parametric model
of the guitar tones, so that the inharmonicity of the tones
could be controlled. A threshold was found for the percepti-
bility of inharmonicity that was close to typical values foundon the guitar. This threshold also depends on whether or not
the attack transients were cropped out of their model. The
relationship between physical and perceived inharmonicityis important for digital sound synthesis, in particular to
assess how realistic a given tone sounds.
Increased inharmonicity has also been invoked to explain
why wound guitar strings “go dead” after some playingtime.
13When a string “goes dead,” it has a dull sound with a
shorter sustain. Houtsma found that this is due to theincreased inharmonicity of a well-used wound guitar string.
Houtsma simulated the stretching and releasing that occurs
each time a guitar string is played and found that this processcaused a mass redistribution due to the windings slippingfrom their original positions. This in turn causes greaterinharmonicity in the partials, which makes it harder to tunethe string exactly and gives it less self-resonance, thus result-ing in a dull, quickly decaying sound.
Clearly, musical string inharmonicity is a phenomenon
that has important consequences in many different areas ofmusical practice, from instrument and sound design to tuningand performance. It is something that musicians and music-
related professionals have grappled with ever since the crea-
tion of stringed instruments whose strings are excited byplucking, striking, or bowing.
Bearing this in mind, and considering the dramatic change
in technology since the measurements of Fletcher in the early1960s, we endeavoured to re-examine the role of inharmo-nicity in pinned strings by examining various sets of steeland nylon guitar strings, both monoﬁlament and wound.Using computers to analyze sound ﬁles makes it easier tocarry out these measurements with greater precision andaccuracy than was possible for Fletcher. These modern tech-niques also easily lend themselves to a rigourous error analy-
sis of B, in particular for the values that were obtained using
Eq.(4).
