Interested In
Assessment of the impact of the anthropogenic environment on children’ s health as a factor in
environmental justice
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2023)
Integrating Equity: Curricular Development and Student Experiences in an Intermediate-Level College
Physics Major Course
Phys. T each.  (November 2020)
The chicken and egg dilemma for Malaysian sustainable development plan against the economic
development in meeting SDG 13 goal
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2022) 04 October 2023 22:56:30
Essential climate change conversations for introductory physics
coursesa)
Abigail R. Daaneb)
South Seattle College, 6000 16th Ave. SW, Seattle, Washington 98106
Jesse Noffsingerc)
(Received 1 December 2022; accepted 14 July 2023)
Climate change issues have become far more complex and better studied over the last few years.
Making sense of how the causes and effects of climate change create a coherent framework can
empower learners to engage in productive discourse and to ask deeper questions. Historical
contexts, current approaches to mitigate climate change, and future demands are all a part of theongoing research and efforts. This global, social justice issue will only become more pressing, and
we need to support students in making informed decisions about their actions going forward. It is
for this reason that we (a physics instructor and an energy consultant) have joined together tocreate a list of topics that all students should consider as they move through our educational
programs.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0137210
I. INTRODUCTION
Climate change has been elevated in public discussions
over the past few decades. As society collectively realizesits associated impacts and the challenges that come withhigher levels of atmospheric emissions, it will becomeincreasingly important for all members of society to betterunderstand climate change. Yet, climate change is a broadtopic and can be approached from many angles in a class-
room. Even still, calculus-based introductory physics
courses rarely discuss crucial climate change issues.Physics instructors often choose to leave this topic to “non-science” majors or to elective courses, leaving a gap of cru-cial knowledge for STEM majors, who often end up in lead-ing roles in climate change mitigation. We risk makingphysics courses obsolete by not changing our content inclass to account for the needs of society around us. Today,exposing students to the pressing equity issues around cli-mate change is necessary, using both deontological andconsequential justiﬁcations. Students pursuing engineeringor computer science degrees, not to mention physics,should be reminded that their careers could be at the serviceof improving our prospects of future living. We urge phys-ics instructors to prioritize making space for conversationsand investigations about climate change, not as a separateclass, but as an overarching theme or weeklong focus of theintroductory physics classes. If time is an issue, many ofthese activities could be completed as online reﬂectionsand/or shorter weekly discussions spread throughout theterm. Many of the topics here are directly related to energyand electricity, so could easily be supplemental to contentalready present in physics courses. One way to approachthis is to think of what you as an instructor might do to con-solidate topics if you had to cancel class for snow days,
sick days, or even just a shorter number of class hours in a
given term—there is always room to squeeze or cut mate-rial! This opens space to include teaching broadly a bout cli-
mate change and also going deeper into aspects such ascauses, scientiﬁc modeling to understand future outcomes,adaptation and mitigation strategies, physical impacts onpeople, wildlife, and the environment, or even current andfuture social and economic impacts arising from climatechange. Common STEM lessons about climate change
include students measuring their carbon footprint, or learn-ing how CO
2becomes stuck in the atmosphere. While these
lessons are important, they only scratch the surface of what
today’s learners need to know to be climate change literate.
We urge introductory physics instructors to engage learnersin productive discourse and empower them to ask deeperquestions about how various aspects of climate change ﬁttogether and create a coherent framework with their physicscanon. It is for this reason that we (a physics instructor andan energy consultant) have co-created a list of discussiontopics and suggested activities that every student should
encounter as they move through introductory calculus-based physics programs. While this may be a bold claim,we posit that adjusting our current physics canon to includedirect teaching a bout climate change will make it more rel-
evant and better equip our students for future careers.
In Secs. 