Interested In
Weighing a Magnet as it Falls with T erminal V elocity Through an Aluminum Pipe
Phys. T each.  (October 2018)
Electromagnetic braking revisited with a magnetic point dipole model
Am. J. Phys.  (April 2016)
Damped fall of magnets inside a conducting pipe
Am. J. Phys.  (February 201 1) 04 October 2023 22:52:51
A magnet falling inside a conducting pipe: Dependence of the drag
force on the magnet orientation
Chang Hyeon Leea)and Byung-Y oon Parkb)
Department of Physics, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 34134, South Korea
(Received 9 July 2021; accepted 28 March 2023)
We develop a simple model to investigate the orientation-dependence of the drag force acting on a
magnet falling inside a vertical conducting pipe. We approximate the magnet by a point magnet andthe pipe by a two-dimensional cylindrical surface. Independent of the magnet’s orientation, the drag
force is proportional to its velocity: ~F
d¼/C0k~v. We show that the coefﬁcient k!of the horizontally
oriented magnet is about 2/3 of the coefﬁcient k"for the vertically oriented magnet. If the magnetic
moment makes an angle hwith the vertical direction, the drag coefﬁcient kcan be expressed as
k¼k"cos2hþk!sin2h. When the magnet falls with a non-vertical orientation, a local charge
distribution is induced in the pipe, which plays a role as important as that of the time-varying magneticﬁeld due to the falling magnet in generating the eddy currents. The model’s predictions are compared
with experimental results.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0062860
I. INTRODUCTION
Dropping a magnet into a vertical conducting pipe is one
of the fascinating demonstrations to illustrate Faraday’s andLenz’s laws in the physics classroom.1Students are gener-
ally very impressed by a magnet drifting slowly downwards
through the pipe. As you will see, this provides a rich experi-ment, which can also illustrate how a free-falling object
reaches a constant terminal velocity due to the drag force it
experiences. The slowing down can be explained intuitivelyby eddy currents ﬂowing in the pipe along the electric ﬁeld
induced by the time-varying magnetic ﬁeld. These eddy cur-
rents generate a magnetic ﬁeld that opposes the motion ofthe magnet. A discussion on the conversion of gravitational
potential energy into Joule heating by eddy currents can be
another talking point in class.
Due to the difﬁculties in handling eddy currents at the fun-
damental physics level, this subject has been discussed only
qualitatively in a few textbooks.
2However, it can be an
interesting physics laboratory experiment to measure andanalyze the terminal magnet velocity and the drag force it
experiences when falling down a conducting pipe,
3and
many interesting works on this subject have been reported.For example, in this journal, elaborated experimental setups
have been suggested for the quantitative analysis of the phe-
nomenon,
4,5the drag force on a cylindrical magnet has been
calculated quantitatively by evaluating the energy dissipation
rate,6the dependences of the drag force on the thickness of
the pipe7and on the shape of the magnet8have been investi-
gated, and the off-axis effects and the dynamics of two mag-
net compositions have been explored.9Recently, it has been
shown that the conducting pipe can be replaced by a cylindermade of kitchen aluminum foils, and the magnet is slowed
down, even when the pipe is slit lengthwise.
10
Eddy currents are easy to visualize in the most ideal situa-
tion where the magnetic moment is vertically aligned and itfalls through the centerline of the pipe. The moving magnet
induces an electric ﬁeld in which the ﬁeld lines form circles
concentric with the pipe. Thus, eddy currents ﬂow alongthose circular paths, and the corresponding current density
can be obtained by applying Ohm’s law. The usual explana-
tion for the slow falling magnet in this case is that themagnetic ﬁelds produced by the Eddy currents oppose the
fall of the magnet, just as if two vertically oriented magnets
were placed below and above the falling magnet.
However, in real life experiments, such ideal conditions can-
not be fulﬁlled. As a consequence, the magnet undergoes a
complex motion during the fall: It changes its orientation,
rotates and precesses about the vertical axis,
9as can be seen
when dropping a button-shaped magnet in a conducting pipe.
To mitigate these effects, people have tried to forcedly maintain
the magnet’s orientation vertical by various techniques: attach-
ing the magnet to two hanging masses,8encasing it in a plastic
shell with a protrusion,5or guiding it using a glass tube.9In
these experiments, it has also been noticed that the magnet does
not fall with a constant terminal velocity. This implies that the
drag force on the magnet depends on its orientation.
In general, the drag force, coming from the magnetic
brake effect, arises whenever the magnet and the conductor
are in relative motion.11,12However, it is not easy to ﬁgure
out intuitively how the drag force acts on a horizontally ori-ented magnet for instance. To answer this question, one
should numerically solve Maxwell’s equations, which is
beyond most undergraduate physics classes.
In this paper, we develop a simple model to calculate the
drag force experienced by a falling magnet, whatever its ori-
entation. We do so by assuming the thin pipe is a two-
dimensional cylindrical surface. We work in the adiabatic
approximation where the magnet’s motion is much slowerthan any electric reaction times in the conductor, so that
eddy currents are assumed to be steady at all times.
We ﬁrst consider a point magnet falling inside an ultra-
thin conducting pipe with either of two extreme orientations:
vertical or horizontal and derive the corresponding drag
forces. Then, we show that the drag force on a magnet with
an arbitrary orientation can be expressed as a linear combina-
tion of the two previously obtained forces. We also carry outan experiment to validate the model’s predictions.
