Interested In
Second law considerations in Fourier heat conduction of a lattice chain in relation to intermolecular
potentials
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2017)
Fourier heat conduction as a phenomenon described within the scope of the second law
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2014)
I. Time Reversibility Concepts, the Second Law and Irreversible Thermodynamics
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 201 1) 04 October 2023 22:49:11
Low-energy scattering parameters: A theoretical derivation
of the effective range and scattering length for arbitrary angularmomentum
Jordi Peraa)and Jordi Boronatb)
Departament de F /C19ısica, Campus Nord B4-B5, Universitat Polite `cnica de Catalunya, E-08034 Barcelona, Spain
(Received 24 November 2021; accepted 3 November 2022)
The most important parameters in the study of low-energy scattering are the s-wave and p-wave
scattering lengths and the s-wave effective range. We solve the scattering problem and ﬁnd two useful
formulas for the scattering length and the effective range for any angular momentum, as long as theWigner threshold law holds. Using that formalism, we obtain a set of useful formulas for the angular-
momentum scattering parameters of four different model potentials: hard-sphere, soft-sphere,
spherical well, and well-barrier potentials. The behavior of the scattering parameters close to Feshbachresonances is also analyzed. Our derivations can be useful as hands-on activities for learning scattering
theory.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0079744
I. INTRODUCTION
The natural way to learn about the forces acting between
particles is to observe their mutual interaction. Most of whatwe know about the micro-world has been established by means
of collision processes. In physics, a well-studied collision pro-
cess is the scattering of an incident particle from a stationarytarget. A free particle (or rather a beam of such particles) withknown characteristics collides with a target particle, interactswith it, and scatters into a modiﬁed free state. One then mea-sures the energy, angular distribution, and other characteristicsof the scattered beam and infers from them the nature andstrength of the forces which, during the collision, actedbetween the projectile and the target.
1In the theoretical analy-
sis of a scattering process, the asymptotic free states of the
scattered particles are the most relevant. Therefore, it is notnecessary to give an interpretation, or even to have a detailedknowledge, of the state vector of the entire system when theparticles are close and interact strongly. This remark is impor-tant in connection with quantum ﬁeld theory, where the inter-pretation of the states of strongly interacting ﬁelds is extremelydifﬁcult, if possible at all. However, it is relatively easy to dis-
cuss the asymptotic free states.
1
Low-energy scattering parameters are fundamental in the
theoretical description of interacting many-body systems. Bylow-energy, we mean that the energy of the particles is muchsmaller than the typical excitation energy of the target. Theequations of state of dilute Bose and Fermi gases depend onthese parameters, which account for the full inter-atomicpotential if the density is low enough;
2,3that is, the range of
the interaction is much smaller than the interparticle distance
/C24q/C01=3. In particular, the so-called universal regime is the one
in which the interaction is fully described by a single parame-ter, the s-wave scattering length. In the universal regime, any
potential with the same scattering length gives the sameenergy, independently of its particular shape. However, whenthe density of the system is increased, effects of the shape ofthe potential arise, and we need to consider more scatteringparameters such as the s-wave effective range. In some recent
studies, these effects have been reported.
4,5In this work, we
ﬁnd both scattering lengths and effective ranges. This leads toa kind of inverse problem; that is, we know a few scatteringparameters of the physical system and the goal is to ﬁnd amodel potential with the same scattering parameters. Then, we
can use this model potential to study the many-body propertiesof the system. Obviously, the solution is not unique, and model
potentials as simple as possible are sought for this purpose.
This paper presents a well-detailed method that leads to
integral expressions that allow the calculation of the scatter-
ing parameters for any angular momentum of the system, as
long as the Wigner threshold law holds, that is, potentialsdecaying at large r faster than 1 =r
nwith n>2lþ3 for each
partial wave. This procedure is not only useful for research-
ers who want to know the value of the scattering parametersbut also for students learning scattering theory. The scatter-
ing problem has been widely studied, and there are many
procedures leading to similar expressions. Bethe found theexpressions for l¼0 scattering,
6and the generalization for
any angular momentum lwas done by Madsen in 2002.7
We show that the low-energy scattering parameters can be
accurately calculated by an integral equation method, allowing
their determination for any angular momentum. Using this result,
we discuss some properties of the scattering parameters around aFeshbach resonance.8The Feshbach resonance occurs when the
energy of a scattering state is very close to the energy of a bound
state and the scattering length diverges. When the divergence iscrossed, a bound state appears. We apply the formulas for getting
analytical results of the angular momentum scattering lengths
and effective ranges for the following potentials: hard-sphere,soft-sphere, spherical well, and well-barrier potential.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec. 