IONAL PHYSICS| MARCH 01 2023
Continuous fractional component Gibbs ensemble Monte
Carlo
Niklas Mayr ; Michael Haring ; Thomas W allek
Am. J. Phys.  91, 235–246 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0135841
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Thermal simulations of STRIKE tiles for the assessment of the CFC prototypes and of the configuration for
SPIDER
AIP Conference Proceedings  (February 2013)
CFC ‐ free refrigeration: Thermoacoustic technology ‐ design, construction, and evaluation
J Acoust Soc Am  (September 1993)
Collection of submicron particles with cloud droplets using the new MIT -CFC
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2013) 04 October 2023 22:50:47
COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS
The Computational Physics Section publishes articles that help students and instructors learn about the com-
putational tools used in contemporary research. Interested authors are encouraged to send a proposal to theeditors of the Section, Jan Tobochnik (jant@kzoo.edu) or Harvey Gould (hgould@clarku.edu). Summarize
the physics and the algorithm you wish to discuss and how the material would be accessible to advanced
undergraduates or beginning graduate students.
Continuous fractional component Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo
Niklas Mayr,a)Michael Haring,b)and Thomas Wallekc)
Institute of Chemical Engineering and Environmental Technology, Graz University of Technology,
Inffeldgasse 25/C, 8010 Graz, Austria
(Received 23 November 2022; accepted 24 November 2022)
A continuous fractional component (CFC) approach increases the probability of particle swaps in
the context of vapor-liquid equilibrium simulations using the Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo
algorithm. Two variants of the CFC approach are compared for simulations of pure Lennard-Jones
(LJ) ﬂuids and binary LJ mixtures as examples. The details of an exemplary CFC implementationare presented. Recommendations are provided to reduce the effort required for the suggested
problems.
VC2023 Author(s) .All article content, except where otherwise noted, is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0135841
I. INTRODUCTION
Since its original development in the 1980s, the Gibbs
ensemble Monte Carlo (GEMC) algorithm has been success-fully applied to the simulation of ﬂuid phase equilibria.
Among the most important advantages of the GEMC algo-
rithm are its simple, intuitive methodology, and the fact that
data for both coexisting phases can be obtained from a single
simulation. The data include macroscopic properties such asthe phase molar fractions, x
i, the phase densities, qi, and the
chemical potentials, li.1A broad range of open-source
GEMC programs has been developed.2–6However, a signiﬁ-
cant limitation of the GEMC algorithm is that the acceptance
probability for molecule swaps becomes low for insertionsinto dense phases, especially if components with large differ-
ences of molecular sizes are simulated.
The goal of this paper is to discuss several variants of the
GEMC algorithm, which increase the probability of particle
swaps in the context of vapor-liquid equilibrium simulations.
For this purpose, two variants of the continuous fractional com-ponent (CFC) approach are compared for pure Lennard-Jones
ﬂuids, binary Lennard-Jones mixtures, ethane, and carbon diox-
ide. Details of a continuous fractional component program in
MATHEMATICA are presented. Simulation protocols are recom-
mended to reduce the effort required for the proposed problems.
This paper is structured as follows: In Sec. 