Implementing a course-based authentic learning experience
with upper- and lower-division physics classesa) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Mikkel Herholdt Jensen ; Eliza J. Morris ; M. W . Ray
Am. J. Phys.  91, 696–700 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0137141
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Authentication scheme interface for mobile e-health monitoring using unique and lightweight identity-based
authentication
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2016)
Timestamp-based password authentication scheme
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2018) 04 October 2023 22:56:20
Implementing a course-based authentic learning experience
with upper- and lower-division physics classesa)
Mikkel Herholdt Jensen,b)Eliza J. Morris,c)and M. W. Rayd)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, California State University, Sacramento, Sacramento, California 95819
(Received 30 November 2022; accepted 28 March 2023)
We describe a dual-class authentic learning experience (ALE) in which undergraduate upper-
division physics students develop low-cost instruments, which are then used by students in a lower-
division course to monitor water quality in rivers. The ALE bridges the experiences of lower- and
upper-division physics majors by involving students across different stages of their college careers ina collaborative project. Lower-division physics students characterize, calibrate, and troubleshoot the
instrument prototypes developed by their upper-division peers, and their work informs instrument
modiﬁcations in future upper-division physics classes. This paper describes the ﬁrst iteration of thisproject along with student perceptions. We ﬁnd that lower-division students report an increase in
their awareness of possible upper-division projects, an increased sense that their coursework has
real-world applications, and a heightened understanding of how physicists can play a role in researchon environmental issues.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0137141
I. INTRODUCTION
The implementation of course-based undergraduate
research experiences (CUREs) in science, technology, engi-neering, and math (STEM) college education has beenshown to convey multiple beneﬁts, including increased stu-
dent retention, growth in translational skills such as commu-
nication and teamwork, and a strengthening of the students’science identity.
1Student retention is a particularly pressing
issue in STEM with attrition disproportionately affecting
persons excluded because of their ethnicity or race(PEERs).2,3Since it is implemented in a course, a CURE can
be a more equitable tool for providing research experiences
and, thus, improving retention rates among underrepresentedgroups in STEM.4
In this paper, we describe the implementation of a similar
program called a course-based authentic learning experience
(ALE). An ALE differs from a CURE in that it can includeany project-based activity, including, but not limited to,
research projects. (“Authentic” here refers to an activity that
a professional in a particular discipline would do.) Our ALEbridges upper- and lower-division physics classes where stu-
dents in an upper-division advanced electronics course build
instruments capable of measuring temperature, depth, andturbidity of the American River, which runs by our campus.The students in this course are tasked with designing and
building the instruments and the user interface. Students in a
lower-division laboratory course will then use them to studythe properties of the river. In this ﬁrst iteration of the project,
students developed and tested the instruments in the labora-
tory only. The feedback from the ﬁrst iteration will then beused by the next set of students in the upper-division course
to improve the instruments. In addition to providing students
with authentic learning experiences as part of their course-work, this project also aims to provide a link between the
lower- and upper-division experiences for our majors and
seeks to integrate aspects of societal and environmentalissues into the physics curriculum to heighten students’
awareness of the role physics can play in these areas.
The American River is a rich natural resource in the
Sacramento area that serves numerous stakeholders. It ishome to hundreds of species and provides a breeding ground
for numerous ﬁsh species, including the endangered Chinooksalmon. At the same time, it serves as an area for human rec-
reation, both in the river and in adjacent green spaces. It also
supplies water to a large segment of the Sacramento popula-tion. Furthermore, Sacramento is historically a ﬂood plain,and regular ﬂooding was a part of life for those living alongthe river. Slightly upstream from Sacramento State are aseries of dams that, together with the extensive levee struc-
ture, keep the water in the river. These dams not only sup-
press ﬂoods but also raise the water levels for navigation andgenerate hydroelectric power. They also substantially alterthe ecology of the downstream river. Since their creation inthe 1950s, there has been a need to balance the demands ofall stakeholders, including the riparian wildlife, which has
seen a marked reduction in habitat.
5Part of maintaining this
balance is a careful monitoring of the river and its propertiessuch as ﬂow and temperature. Indeed, the United StatesGeological Survey (USGS) monitors depth, ﬂow, and tem-perature at multiple sites along the river. These sampling
locations are often along bridge pylons near the middle of
the river. To better understand the full hydrological pictureof the river, the long-term goal of our project is to developinexpensive instruments capable of measuring hydrologicalproperties of the river at multiple transverse locations acrossthe river. These instruments can capture not only tempera-
ture and ﬂow but also turbidity, an important element in the
consideration of the river’s hydrology-sediment regime and,thus, the overall health of the river. Here, we report on theﬁrst phase of the project: The design, construction, and test-ing of the instruments, all of which was done by undergradu-ate students across two courses.
This project is one of numerous ongoing ALE projects
that are part of the National Science Foundation-funded pro-
gram Sustainable Interdisciplinary Research to InspireUndergraduate Success (NSF SIRIUS-