Interested In
Influence of dif ferent air inlet configurations of a paraglider ’s open airfoil performance
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2018)
A new algorithm for small object tracking based on super-resolution technique
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2017)
Answer to Question #69. Hovering birds
American Journal of Physics  (March 2001) 04 October 2023 22:51:50
Paragliders’ launch trajectory is universal
Quentin Da Cruz Lopes,a)Sophie Ramananarivo,b)Caroline Cohen,
and Michael Benzaquenc)
LadHyX UMR CNRS 7646, /C19Ecole polytechnique, 91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France
(Received 31 May 2022; accepted 11 January 2023)
We designed and built a reduced-scale model experiment to study the paragliding inﬂation and
launching phase at given traction force. We show that the launch trajectory of a single skin glider isuniversal, that is, independent of the exerted force. As a consequence, the length of the take-off run
required for the glider to reach its “ready to launch” vertical position is also universal. We
successfully compare our results to full-scale experiments and show that such universality can beunderstood through a simple theoretical model.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0101359
I. INTRODUCTION
Paragliding is a young adventure sport dating back to the
early 1980s, in which a lightweight wing with no rigid pri-mary structure is launched by a running pilot. For a physicist,
it is a truly endless source of fascinating unexplored prob-
lems, combining a variety of ﬁelds from ﬂuid mechanics toﬂuid-structure interactions, and including ﬂight mechanics,materials science, micrometeorology, and even game theoryin the context of understanding exploration-exploitationstrategies of thermal convection.
1,2Indeed, cross-country ﬂy-
ing combines climbs using thermal updrafts and glidesthrough stationary air. Race pilots seeking to cover the great-est possible distance must ﬁnd the right balance between the
individualistic strategy based on one’s knowledge to ﬁnd
the next nascent thermal, with the risk of missing out, andthe collective strategy consisting in following other pilotswho concentrate where the thermals are located with the riskof getting there too late.
Since the ﬁrst prototypes, paraglider wings have continu-
ously evolved, both in terms of performance and security.Most of the research done by paragliding manufacturers hasfocused on optimising wings for steady ﬂight phases,
3,4and
unsteady regimes have only received limited attention.5In
particular, many questions remain unsolved when it comesto the dynamics of stalls or wing collapses. Further researchmay, therefore, provide quantitative elements to improve thesafety of modern gliders, the airworthiness certiﬁcation ofwhich is now based on the rather qualitative feelings of testpilots. In addition, accidentology studies show that a sub-stantial fraction of accidents occur during take-off,
6,7which
makes the study of the launch phase crucial.
In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of the launching
phase of a single skin wing: How does a seemingly simple
piece of fabric inﬂate when pulled by the pilot to become areasonably stable aircraft in just a matter of seconds? Toanswer this question, we designed and built a reduced-scalemodel experiment and studied the paragliding inﬂation andlaunching phases at given traction forces. We found that thelaunch trajectory is universal—in the sense that it does notdepend on the strength of the exerted force—and, as a result,
neither does the distance required for the glider to reach its
“ready to launch” vertical position. Due to the limitations ofthe model experiment, namely, the difﬁculty of scaling downthe stiffness of the materials (fabric, lines linking the fabricto the risers which, in turn, are connected to the harness
8),we also performed full-scale experiments on the ﬁeld that
showed excellent agreement with the reduced-scale experi-
mental results.
