IL 01 2023
Fundamental properties of beamsplitters in classical and
quantum optics 
Masud Mansuripur ; Ewan M. W right
Am. J. Phys.  91, 298–306 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0102760
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Beamsplitters
Exploring Laser Light
A tunable path-separated electron interferometer with an amplitude-dividing grating beamsplitter
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (December 2018)
On-chip beamsplitter operation on single photons from quasi-resonantly excited quantum dots embedded
in GaAs rib waveguides
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (July 2015) 04 October 2023 22:51:26
Fundamental properties of beamsplitters in classical and quantum
optics
Masud Mansuripura)and Ewan M. Wrightb)
James C. Wyant College of Optical Sciences, The University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721
(Received 12 June 2022; accepted 21 January 2023)
A lossless beamsplitter has certain (complex-valued) probability amplitudes for sending an
incoming photon into one of two possible directions. We use elementary laws of classical andquantum optics to obtain general relations among the magnitudes and phases of these probability
amplitudes. Proceeding to examine a pair of (nearly) single-mode wavepackets in the number-
states n
1jiand n2jithat simultaneously arrive at the splitter’s input ports, we ﬁnd the distribution of
photon-number states at the output ports using an argument inspired by Feynman’s scattering
analysis of indistinguishable Bose particles. The result thus obtained coincides with that of the
standard quantum-optical treatment of beamsplitters via annihilation and creation operators ^a
and ^a†. A simple application of the Feynman method provides a form of justiﬁcation for the
Bose enhancement implicit in the well-known formulas ^anji¼ﬃﬃﬃnpn/C01ji and
^a†nji¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃnþ1pnþ1ji .#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0102760
I. INTRODUCTION
In quantum optics, as in classical optics, beamsplitters
play an important role in many experimental settings.1,2
Typically, a lossless beamsplitter has two input ports (1 and
2) as well as two output ports (3 and 4). A well-collimated
wavepacket propagating in free space and arriving at one ofthe input ports can, to good approximation, be said to have
frequency x, wave-vector k¼x=cðÞ ^j, and polarization
state ^e.3,4Upon entering an input port, the incident packet
splits into a pair of wavepackets x;k3;^e ðÞ andx;k4;^e ðÞ that
emerge from ports 3 and 4 along the directions ^j3and ^j4,
respectively. In classical optics, one states that the E-ﬁeld
amplitude of the incoming packet, either E1^eorE2^e, divides
between those of the outgoing packets E3^eandE4^e. The var-
ious output-to-input ratios Eout=Ein(generally, four complex
numbers) then serve to specify the splitter’s operational char-acteristics. In practice, beamsplitters are often constructed inthe form of multilayer dielectric stacks, in which case their
characteristic output-to-input amplitude ratios are referred to
as their Fresnel reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients.
5–9In
this paper, we shall refer to the various Eout=Einratios as the
Fresnel coefﬁcients, even though the beamsplitter could have
a different physical structure such as a (lossless) diffraction
grating.
The classical output-to-input amplitude ratios Eout=Ein
also serve as the (complex) probability amplitudes for
single-mode wavepackets x;kin;^e ðÞ occupied by the single-
photon-number-state 1 jithat enter an input port and then
emerge from an output port as a single-mode packet
x;kout;^e ðÞ in the number state 1 ji.1,2In Sec. 