Interested In
Stabilized motion of a freely falling bristled disk
Physics of Fluids  (November 2020)
Eccentric disks falling in water
Physics of Fluids  (March 2021)
Weighing a Magnet as it Falls with T erminal V elocity Through an Aluminum Pipe
Phys. T each.  (October 2018) 04 October 2023 22:54:54
Modeling the induced voltage of a disk magnet in free fall
Nolan Samboya)
Department of Physical and Biological Sciences, Western New England University, 1215 Wilbraham Road,
Springﬁeld, Massachusetts 01119
(Received 9 January 2023; accepted 27 April 2023)
We drop a circular disk magnet through a thin coil of wire, record the induced voltage, and
compare the results to an analytic model based on the dipole approximation and Faraday’s law,
which predicts that the difference between the voltage peak magnitudes corresponding to the entryand exit of the magnet should be in proportion to z
/C01=2
0, where z0is the initial height of the magnet
above the center of the coil. Agreement between the model and experimental data is excellent. This
easily reproduced experiment provides an opportunity for students at a range of levels toquantitatively explore the effects of magnetic induction.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0141862
I. INTRODUCTION
Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction is fundamental
to any introductory physics sequence. While it is straightfor-
ward to demonstrate qualitatively, providing students with a
quantitative experiment is more challenging. A common
approach is to drop a magnet through a conducting loop and
measure consequences of that relative motion. These experi-
ments tend to fall into two basic categories: (i) inducing
resistive magnetic forces via eddy currents1–5and (ii) induc-
ing a voltage signal that is visualized in real time using com-
puter acquisition software.6–10In this paper, we follow the
second group and describe an experiment where students
drop a circular disk magnet through an induction coil and
relate the resulting peak voltage values to the drop height of
the magnet. Such an approach presents a good mix of intui-
tion gained from introductory mechanics and electromag-
netic phenomena. The recent paper of Gadre et al. describes
an experiment similar to that which we describe here, but
our analysis is more thorough and explicitly compares exper-
imental results to theoretical predictions.10While some of
the details provided here are outside the scope of an intro-
ductory level course, they would be accessible to upper-level
students and are critical to the discussion contained herein.
