Interested In
The nature of particle–wave complementarity
American Journal of Physics  (January 1998)
New Existence Conditions for Order Complementarity Problems
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 2009)
From Como to Copenhagen: The Beginnings and Ends of Complementarity
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2007) 04 October 2023 22:58:01
Complementarity and entanglement in a simple model of inelastic
scattering
David Kordahla)
Department of Physics and Engineering, Centenary College of Louisiana, Shreveport, Louisiana 71104
(Received 5 January 2023; accepted 12 June 2023)
A simple model coupling a one-dimensional beam particle to a one-dimensional harmonic oscillator is
used to explore complementarity and entanglement. This model, well-known in the inelastic scatteringliterature, is presented under three different conceptual approaches, with both analytical and numerical
techniques discussed for each. In a purely classical approach, the ﬁnal amplitude of the oscillator can
be found directly from the initial conditions. In a partially quantum approach, with a classical beamand a quantum oscillator, the ﬁnal magnitude of the quantum-mechanical amplitude for the oscillator’s
ﬁrst excited state is directly proportional to the oscillator’s classical amplitude of vibration. Nearly the
same ﬁrst-order transition probabilities emerge in the partially and fully quantum approaches, butconceptual differences emerge. The two-particle scattering wavefunction clariﬁes these differences
and allows the consequences of quantum entanglement to be explored.
#2023 Published under an exclusive
license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0141389
I. INTRODUCTION
An understanding of quantum concepts is often built by
overlapping classical analogies, analytical models, andnumerical illustrations. After learning about a particle’s clas-
sical momentum, students are shown that a particle’s de
Broglie wavelength depends on the inverse of that momen-
tum. Students may then analytically model the one-
dimensional (1 D) reﬂection and transmission of de Brogliewaves from a potential barrier, whose analogous classical
counterparts would all have been stopped by the same bar-
rier. Further insight can be gained by numerically modelingsuch reﬂection and transmission events using wave packets.
Each of these approaches teases out new qualitative and
quantitative connections.
1
Recent years have seen an increasing consensus that the
concept of entanglement—the inability of some quantum
states to be written as the product of individual particlestates—should be a part of every student’s quantum toolkit.
As Schroeder pointed out in “Entanglement isn’t just for
spins,” entanglement generically arises when quantum par-ticles interact with each other.
2In that paper, Schroeder pre-
sented two dynamical models showing how entanglement
emerges, but lamented that such examples are rarely
included in quantum mechanics textbooks. “The reason,” he
conceded, “is probably that despite their conceptual simplic-ity, a quantitative treatment of either scenario requires
numerical methods.”
This paper presents a conceptually simple model that can
model entanglement without resorting to numerical methods.The level of mathematical difﬁculty in this treatment is simi-
lar to that of the commonly taught models involving poten-
tial barriers. The model is a simpliﬁed 1D treatment of
inelastic scattering. It is well-known to the electron spectros-
copy community
3and is similar to the model of a 1D atom
scattering off a 1D harmonic oscillator presented in this jour-
nal several decades ago by Knudson,4though this treatment
differs in its attention to the time-evolution of the scatteringprocess.
In the model under review, a beam particle is coupled to a
harmonic oscillator, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The modelHamiltonian sums the contributions of a 1D free particle of
mass m(position variable x, conjugate momentum p
x), a 1D
harmonic oscillator of reduced mass land resonance fre-
quency x0(position variable y, conjugate momentum py),
and an interaction term H1that couples the two systems
H¼H0
beamþH0
HOþH1
¼p2
x
2m|{z}
beamþp2
y
2lþ1
2lx2
0y2
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
harmonic oscillator/C0ayfðxÞ|ﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄ}
interaction: (1)
The coupling constant arationalizes units and tunes the
strength of the interaction, and the spatially varying “window
function” f(x) is taken to have units of length–2and to die off
asxapproaches 61. The negative sign in H1means that the
oscillator is attracted toward the beam when aandf(x) are
positive, but changing this sign would not signiﬁcantly alterany results.
Though its form is simple, this model can be used to cap-
ture real physics. For instance, in “Characterizing localizedsurface plasmons using electron energy-loss spectroscopy,”Cherqui et al.
5derived “classical” and “quantum”
Hamiltonians for the electron-plasmon interaction (their Eqs.14 and 15) that map, respectively, onto our Eqs. (1)and(30),
but for the fact that an electron couples to inﬁnitely manyplasmonic modes, while our beam couples to just one oscil-lator. For the plasmonic case, as an electron nears a nanopar-ticle, a surface charge is induced, which in turn interactswith the electron via the Coulomb potential. The physics inthis model is analogous, with the passing beam tugging onthe oscillator, and the oscillator in turn tugging back on thebeam.
In addition to its discussion of entanglement, this presenta-
tion also highlights conceptual issues surrounding classical/quantum complementarity.
6Complementarity is explored
implicitly as different approaches to the model are pre-sented—a classical approach (Sec. 