Interested In
Development of spin coater with close loop control system using A TMega8535 microcontroller
AIP Conference Proceedings  (February 2016)
Diagnosis and therapy for a recalcitrant parylene coater
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A  (July 1987)
Mass Spectrometric Studies on the Limitations of Oil Dif fusion Pumped Coaters
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol.  (July 1970) 04 October 2023 22:48:49
Low-cost automated spin coater and thermal annealer for additive
prototyping of multilayer Bragg reflectors
Nathan J. Dawsona)
College of Natural and Computational Sciences, Hawaii Paciﬁc University, Kaneohe, Hawaii 96744
Yunli Lu
College of Natural and Computational Sciences, Hawaii Paciﬁc University, Kaneohe, Hawaii 96744
ZoeLowtherb)
College of Natural and Computational Sciences, Hawaii Paciﬁc University, Kaneohe, Hawaii 96744
Jacob Abell
College of Natural and Computational Sciences, Hawaii Paciﬁc University, Kaneohe, Hawaii 96744
Nicholas D. Christianson
College of Natural and Computational Sciences, Hawaii Paciﬁc University, Kaneohe, Hawaii 96744
Aaron W. Weiser
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio 44555
Gioia Aquino
College of Engineering, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822
(Received 20 February 2022; accepted 16 September 2022)
We present and implement a design for an automated system that fabricates multilayer photonic crystal
structures. The device is constructed with low-cost materials. A polystyrene/cellulose acetate
multilayer Bragg reﬂector was fabricated to conﬁrm the device’s capability. A distributed feedbacklaser was also fabricated and characterized. The system has also been used to fabricate microlasers for
a Modern Physics laboratory assignment in which students measure ﬂuorescence, ampliﬁed
spontaneous emission, lasing from one-dimensional Bragg reﬂectors, and lasing from scattering media.https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0088776
I. INTRODUCTION
Photonic crystals are an important class of materials
because they interact strongly with visible light through wave
interference.
1,2They are observed in nature3–7and also ﬁnd
many uses in science and technology.8–10One-dimensional
photonic crystal are used for antireﬂection coatings,10vapor
sensors,9,11and other photonic devices such as distributed
feedback lasers.8,12–14Inorganic and hybrid materials are
often used to fabricate multilayer photonic crystals,15–17but
polymers offer an inexpensive alternative to many costly
materials and their morphologies are more easily manipulated
at the nanoscale. Thus, polymers have emerged as a cost-
effective option for fabricating photonic materials.18
Spin coating and annealing each individual layer “by hand”
can be a serious undertaking where each prototype ﬁlm can
require hours to days of repetitive steps. Thus, automating the
process can greatly decrease the burden on a student or
researcher. In this paper, we describe a low-cost, turnkey sys-tem to spin/anneal polymer multilayer ﬁlms that can be cre-
ated from common consumer electronics parts and materials
found at local hardware stores. Two applications of multilayer
photonic crystals fabricated with the automated system are
also presented—a visibly reﬂective Bragg mirror followed bya distributed feedback (DFB) laser. Implementation of the
DFB lasers into a coherent light emission assignment for a
modern physics laboratory course is also discussed.
