Interested In
Glass T ransition in a Spherical Monatomic Liquid
AIP Conference Proceedings  (February 2008)
Characteristics of a barrier discharge in monatomic and molecular gases
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (May 1999)
A facile strategy to produce monatomic tantalum metallic glass
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (September 2020) 04 October 2023 22:48:52
Experimental realization of an additively manufactured monatomic
lattice for studying wave propagation
Nehemiah Mork,a)Sai A. R. Kuchibhatla,b)and Michael J. Leamyc)
George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
771 Ferst Dr NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30313
Matthew D. Fronk
Physics Department, U.S. Naval Academy, 572C Holloway Road, Annapolis, Maryland 21402
(Received 12 January 2022; accepted 26 September 2022)
Increasing interest in wave propagation in phononic systems and metamaterials motivates the
development of experimental designs, measurement techniques, and fabrication methods for use in
basic research and classroom demonstrations. The simplest phononic system, the monatomic chain,
exhibits rich physics such as dispersion and frequency-domain ﬁltering. However, a limitednumber of experimental studies showcase monatomic chains for macroscale observation of
phonons. Herein, we discuss the design, fabrication, and testing of monatomic lattices as enabled
by three-dimensional (3D) printing. Using this widely available technology, we provide designguidelines for realization of a monatomic chain composed of 3D printed serpentine springs and
press-ﬁtted cylindrical masses. We also present measurement techniques that record propagating
waves and algorithms for the experimental determination of dispersion behavior.
#2023 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0085124
I. INTRODUCTION
Wave propagation in phononic lattices and metamaterials
exhibits rich physics of interest to the education and research
communities. Recent studies have documented the perfor-
mance of phononic lattices as ﬁlters,1,2lenses,3,4and
diodes.5,6In classroom settings, phononic lattices provide an
accessible case study on dispersion, group velocity, and
phase velocity.7–9Perhaps the simplest phononic lattice, the
monatomic chain, is composed of a single mass and spring
that repeats periodically.10–14However, these manually
assembled designs can be tedious to realize, exhibit vulnera-
bility to impurities in their periodicity, are susceptible toout-of-plane and torsional motions, experience signiﬁcant
dissipation at interfaces and where contact is made with con-
straining structures, and lack the technological sophistication
that excites students in science and engineering. In addition,
traditional designs typically capture standing waves, as
opposed to travelling waves, in ﬁnite lattices.15–17The inher-
ent challenges associated with fabricating and assembling a
large number of unit cells with few defects and low dissipa-
tion create a formidable barrier to experimental observation
of travelling waves in mechanical lattices.
Additive manufacturing is an advanced but increasingly
widespread fabrication method capable of rapidly producingmaterials with a high degree of uniformity. 3D printing is a
common additive manufacturing technique in which parts
are created one layer at a time. Because of its repeatable,
high throughput nature, 3D printing can quickly fabricate
easy-to-assemble periodic structures with high geometric
complexity and low disorder. While prior studies have suc-
cessfully implemented 3D printing to produce lattice materi-
als, they considered structures with continuous, multi-modal
elastic members.18–20Embedded masses vibrate “locally”
relative to the host medium instead of directly coupling to
their nearest neighbor via a massless spring-like connection.Consequently, higher-order structural dynamics of the elastic
members between masses can be excited, which would beundesirable for a discrete lattice experiment showcasing one-
dimensional phonon propagation.
In this paper, we discuss the design, fabrication, and test-
ing of precision monatomic lattices as enabled by additive
manufacturing. In doing so, we detail an experiment demon-strating travelling wave packets in a monatomic lattice suit-
able for an undergraduate physics course using equipment
that is becoming increasingly widespread, user-friendly, andaffordable. Although we focus on a monatomic lattice for
our demonstration, we discuss generic experimental design
guidelines, which can be applied to more complicated sys-tems such as diatomic chains and Su–Schrieffer–Heeger lat-tices. We seek to inform and empower future experiments
with tunable, rapidly fabricated, precision lattices that sup-
port macroscopic phonon propagation.
We organize this paper as follows: First, we review pho-
nonic behavior in inﬁnite and ﬁnite monatomic lattices.
Next, we discuss the experimental design and parameter
choices. We then present the design of 3D printed serpentinesprings with integrated mass casings for tuning the stiffness
of a macro-scale monatomic lattice. We borrow the serpen-
tine spring design from the micro-electromechanical systems(MEMS)
21–23community and use the design to overcome
many issues with traditional methods noted earlier. Finally,
we present results obtained from the fabricated setup thatcaptures wave propagation and dispersion on the macroscale,
before concluding with ﬁnal remarks.
