Interested In
Effect of spent bleaching earth based bio organic fertilizer on growth, yield and quality of eggplants under
field condition
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2013)
Preliminary study on dif ferential of stomatal conductance during day and night-time in eggplant seedlings
(Solanum melongena )
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2022)
Baking quality , texture and sensory evaluation of gluten free cake made from modified taro flour
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2019) 04 October 2023 23:13:31
A simple and low-cost experimental method to determine the thermal
diffusivity of various types of foods
Lisa R. Wang
The Pennington School, 112 W Delaware Ave., Pennington, New Jersey 08534
Yifei “Jenny” Jin
Phillips Academy Andover, 180 Main Street, Andover, Massachusetts 01810
Jian Jim Wanga)
NanoNuvo Corporation, Belle Mead, New Jersey 08502
(Received 1 February 2022; accepted 4 May 2022)
A simple low-cost method was used to measure the thermal diffusivity of nine different types of
foods: potato, sweet potato, pumpkin, taro, radish, eggplant, lemon, tomato, and onion. We cut the
foods into spherical shapes, inserted thermocouple sensors into their centers, and immersed them in
boiling water. Fitting the time dependence of the center temperature to a heat-conduction modelyielded a value for the thermal diffusivity with good consistency between spheres of different
radii. This method can be generalized to determine thermal diffusivity of a wide variety of
samples.
VC2022 Author(s) .All article content, except where otherwise noted, is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0087135
I. INTRODUCTION
Thermal diffusivity controls the heat transfer process via
the equation $2T¼a/C01ð@T=@tÞ, where Tis the temperature
andais the thermal diffusivity. This equation describes one
of the most important physical phenomena governing theworld-heat transfer and exchange. Thermal diffusivity is
expressed mathematically as a¼k/qc, where ais the thermal
diffusivity in m2/s,qis the density (kg/m3), and cis the spe-
ciﬁc heat (J/(kg K)).
In 1979, Unsworth and Duarte presented a simple method
to determine the thermal diffusivity for rubber spheres by
measuring the rate of cooling of their centers.1The process
required gluing a spiral-shaped thermocouple to the center ofa rubber hemisphere and joining two hemispheres to make awhole sphere. Probably due to the difﬁculty of preparing thesamples, only spheres of a single diameter were studied. We
show that, by varying the diameter of the spheres, students
can discover for themselves the simple scaling relationshipbetween diameter and time, and by making the spheres out ofa variety of foods, they can easily prepare interesting samples.
