INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| SEPTEMBER 01 2022
Apparatus and method to recover the Mueller matrix in
bright-field microscopy 
Sofia Obando-V asquez ; Ana Doblas  
 ; Carlos T rujillo  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 702–714 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0081673
 CHORUS
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
The Polar Decomposition And V ector Parametrization Of The Mueller Matrices
AIP Conference Proceedings  (March 2010)
Mueller matrix ellipsometry of waveplates for control of their properties and alignment
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. B  (December 2019)
Characterization of inclined GaSb nanopillars by Mueller matrix ellipsometry
J. Appl. Phys.  (July 2010) 04 October 2023 23:17:03
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
Apparatus and method to recover the Mueller matrix
in bright-field microscopy
Sofia Obando-Vasquez
Applied Optics Group, School of Applied Science and Engineering, Universidad EAFIT, Medell ~An, Colombia
Ana Doblasa)
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee 38152
Carlos Trujillob)
Applied Optics Group, Physical Sciences Department, Universidad EAFIT, Medell ~An, Colombia
(Received 9 December 2021; accepted 10 June 2022)
We present a simple experiment developed for the advanced physics instructional laboratory to
calculate the Mueller matrix of a microscopic sample. The Mueller matrix is obtained fromintensity-based images of the sample acquired by a polarization-sensitive microscope. The
experiment requires a bright-ﬁeld microscope and standard polarizing optical components such as
linear polarizers and waveplates. We provide a practical procedure for implementing the apparatus,measuring the complete Mueller matrix of linear polarizers used as samples, and discuss the
possibility of analyzing biological samples using our apparatus and method. Due to the simplicity
of the apparatus and method, this experiment allows students to increase their knowledge aboutlight polarization and initiate their training in optical instrumentation.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0081673
I. INTRODUCTION
Visible light is an electromagnetic wave in which electric
and magnetic ﬁelds oscillate perpendicularly to the directionof propagation. When the electric ﬁeld oscillation is welldeﬁned over time, light is said to be polarized. Depending onhow the electric ﬁeld is oriented, the polarization state oflight can be classiﬁed as linear, circular, or elliptical polari-
zation. The latter type of polarization provides the most gen-
eral description of polarized light. Polarization is a standardtopic in undergraduate physics courses, which are focused onthe wave properties of light.
1
Polarization can be useful in a variety of imaging applica-
tions. In photography, the insertion of polarizers in imagingsystems reduces glare from light scattering, increases con-
trast, eliminates hot spots from reﬂective objects, and detects
hidden image features.2Polarization is also used to evaluate
stress in amorphous solids such as glass and plastic.3Stress
from temperature and pressure proﬁles in birefringent andnonhomogeneous materials introduces localized variationsand gradients of the material properties. This stress can be
observed and quantiﬁed in transparent objects using polar-
ized light methodologies
4due to the localized changes in the
refractive index.5Polarization has also been used in thechemical, pharmaceutical, and food and beverage industries,
enabling the detection and quantiﬁcation of the chemicalcompounds. Many organic chemical compounds (including
active pharmaceutical ingredients and sugars) are optically
active, rotating the polarization state of the light in differentdirections based on their nature and concentration.
1
Polarimetry has also provided a vast number of applications indifferent ﬁelds of astrophysics from solar physics to cosmol-ogy. For example, polarimetry allows the description and mea-surement of magnetic ﬁelds of astrophysical objects (intensityand orientation), quantities that cannot be measured directly.
6
Polarization has also been used in microscopy.7–9In a
simple polarization microscope system, two linear polarizers
are inserted. The ﬁrst polarizer is inserted in front of the illu-mination source to polarize the incident light linearly,whereas the second polarizer is set in front of the sensor(commonly known as the analyzer).
10The transmission axis
of the analyzer is rotated at 90/C14to the transmission axis of
the ﬁrst polarizer. If an anisotropic or birefringent specimenis inserted between the crossed polarizers, the specimen pro-
duces two perpendicular wave components (ordinary and
extraordinary wavefronts) with a phase difference betweenthem. These wavefronts are then recombined by constructiveand destructive interference at the analyzer.
1In such a
702 Am. J. Phys. 90(9), September 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 702 04 October 2023 23:17:03
conﬁguration, the analyzer only transmits light that has expe-
rienced a specimen-induced phase shift between the perpen-
dicular components and continues to block all the light from
the source initially polarized by the ﬁrst polarizer. The
resulting high-contrast intensity is proportional to the speci-
men thickness and birefringence.11Since many biological
samples, including cancer cells12,13and tendons,14are intrin-
sically birefringent, polarization-sensitive microscopy has
been a hot topic in biological studies over the last decades.
Polarization-sensitive microscopy has enabled the detection
and screening of diseases by analyzing the polarimetric prop-
erties of biological samples. In 2009, Palacios et al. com-
pared the capability of different techniques for extracting
information from biological samples,15concluding that
polarization-sensitive techniques provide more information
than nonpolarization approaches to the study of biological
and inorganic samples. In 2015, Pirnstill and Cot developed
a cheap, portable polarization microscope for detecting
malaria in blood samples using a cell phone.16In 2018,
Wang et al. studied the change in the birefringence in
bladder normal and cancerous tissue.12
Due to the wide-ranging application of light polarization
in many important ﬁelds, educators introduce students to the
fundamentals of this topic in basic instructional and research
activities. Several polarization experiments are commonly
taught in the introductory optical laboratory: veriﬁcation of
Malus’ law,17measurement of the Brewster angle for the
glass–air interface,18computation of the Stokes parame-
ters,19and retrieval of the reﬂected and transmitted waves’
polarization characteristics.
Polarization-based techniques are commonly based on
estimating the Jones or Mueller matrices of the studied sam-
ples. While the estimation of the Jones matrix requires an
optical interferometer,20the Mueller matrix can be calcu-
lated directly from intensity-based images,21resulting in a
more straightforward optical conﬁguration. Another advan-
tage of the Mueller formalism is its applicability to polarizedand depolarized light.22Using the Mueller formalism, the
sample’s birefringence, diattenuation, and depolarization can
be estimated. These parameters represent a biological sam-
ple’s polarization properties.23
In this paper, we present a complete method for estimating
the Mueller matrix from intensity-based measurements. We
also provide a detailed description of the required experimen-
tal system, including alignment procedures and softwaretools, so that students can carry out a measurement of a sam-
ple’s polarimetric properties. First, we present the alignment
protocol to convert a brightﬁeld microscope into apolarization-sensitive microscope by inserting a polarization
state generator (PSG) and a polarization state analyzer (PSA).
Then, we use our system to study the polarizing properties ofa linear polarizer whose transmission axis is oriented at 0
/C14,
þ45/C14,a n d9 0/C14with respect to the PSG and two biological
samples. The proposed method for obtaining the Muellermatrix only requires conventional optical elements in a sim-
ple arrangement, making it easy to implement and use. The
system is a valuable educational tool, providing students use-ful experience with the polarization properties of light.
