IL 01 2022
How physics textbooks embed meaning in the equals sign 

Dina Zohrabi Alaee ; Eleanor C. Sayre ; Kellianne Kornick ; Scott V . Franklin
Am. J. Phys.  90, 273–278 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009096
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Designing EMB-based Mealy FSM with transformation of collections of output functions
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2015)
Mechanical approach to surface tension and capillary phenomena
Am. J. Phys.  (March 2021)
Shape oscillation and stability of an encapsulated microbubble translating in an acoustic wave
J. Acoust. Soc. Am.  (October 2018) 04 October 2023 23:06:33
How physics textbooks embed meaning in the equals sign
Dina Zohrabi Alaee
School of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York 14623-5603
Eleanor C. Sayrea)
School of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York 14623-5603
and Department of Physics, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506
Kellianne Kornick and Scott V. Franklin
School of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York 14623-5603
(Received 17 May 2021; accepted 2 December 2021)
Physics as a discipline embeds conceptual meaning about the physical world in mathematical
formalism. The meaning associated with mathematical symbols depends on context, and physicistscan shift conceptual meaning by manipulating those symbols. We present an analysis of the
different physical meanings associated with the equals sign “ ¼” that can be inferred from
introductory and upper-level physics textbooks. Five distinct meanings/categories are identiﬁed:causality, balancing, deﬁnitional, assignment, and calculation, each with operational deﬁnitions
that help identify their presence. The different uses can be seen to link mathematical equations to
intuitive conceptual ideas, and signiﬁcant differences in the frequency with which these are usedexist between textbooks of different levels.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009096
I. INTRODUCTION
Mathematics is the language of physics. Taking up this
metaphor, in this study, we examine “grammar” on a minutelevel (cf. Ref. 1with Ref. 2) to investigate the particular
manner, in which the equals sign is used in physics textbooks
across the undergraduate curriculum. The concept of mathe-matical equality is surprisingly complex, and several studieshave documented that students often misinterpret the equalssign as an operational, not relational, symbol.
3–8
We seek a record of how equals signs are used across
physics programs. For U.S. physics university curricula, this
means focusing on textbooks, which we believe represent
some amount of disciplinary consensus. We look at ﬁvephysics textbooks to investigate the language that authors
use in a physics context. Focusing attention on the structure
of the equations involving the equals sign leads to an under-
standing of an equation’s underlying meaning, which can
then help illuminate the dialect of mathematics used inphysics.
There is a long history of mathematics education research,
mostly in K–12 contexts, into students’ understanding of
mathematical symbols, in general, and equality, in particular
(e.g., Refs. 9–11 ). In one of the earliest studies, Behr et al.
9
observed that elementary school children “consider the sym-
bol¼as a ‘do something signal’ that ‘gives the answer’ on
the right-hand side. There is a strong tendency among all thechildren to view the ¼symbol as being acceptable when one
(or more) operation signs precede it.”
Falkner et al.
12identiﬁed that kindergarten students under-
stood the concept of equality but struggled to transfer that
understanding to algebraic problems, often interpreting the
equals sign as indicating action (a “do it” sign). Knuth et al.3
linked middle school students’ understanding of the equals
sign with their ability to solve problems involving algebraic
equations. These and other contemporaneous studies focus
on the mathematically appropriate abstractions of equality,
using physical systems primarily as examples andillustrations. Other studies conﬁrm that students across K–12
see the equals sign as primarily an operational symboland do not have a deeper understanding of mathematicalequivalence.
3,11,13Kieran11found that the idea of the equals
sign as an operator is formed before formal education begins
and continues throughout high school. As instructors, wehave seen students in university physics classes use it as a doit symbol as well, sometimes writing lines of math that
include multiple equal signs, mirroring sequential keys they
would type on a calculator. In these long lines of mathemat-ics, the left side of the ﬁrst equal sign may or may not beequal to the right side of the last equal sign, because a hall-
mark of do it is to connect individual pieces of mathematical
procedures in order from left to right, not to build a mathe-matical sentence, which can be read in either direction. Thisview encourages students to see formulas as knowledge to bememorized and prevents a recognition of the underlying
meaning and structure.
Most physics education research on direct problem solving
(as opposed to, say, broader sense-making) has focusedeither on students’ conceptual understanding or on engage-ment with mathematical processing, rarely connecting the
two. In a review of over a decade of published articles on
problem solving from nine leading physics and science edu-cation journals, Kuo et al.
14found “no studies that focused
upon the mathematical processing step or described alterna-
tives to using equations as computational tools.” This is
despite the general recognition that the interpretationof mathematical symbols is a skill necessary to developstudents’ understanding of physics.
15–17Subsequently,
Uhden et al.18used the term “mathematization” in develop-
ing a model for how mathematics is used in physics educa-tion. To understand students’ mathematizing in physics, it isnecessary to identify how students represent concepts sym-
bolically, verify solutions, and connect both to the physical
world.
19–22
To understand “how students understand physics equa-
tions,” Sherin23,24proposed symbolic forms , cognitive
273 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 273 04 October 2023 23:06:33
primitives that associate physics conceptual meaning with
mathematical symbols. Tuminaro and Redish25subsequently
used symbolic forms to model how students translate mathe-
matical solutions into physical understanding, with Kuo
et al.14ﬁnding that students do not expect conceptual knowl-
edge of mathematics to connect to their problem solving. We
take up the idea of symbolic forms and focus on the concep-
tual meaning behind the equals sign. More broadly, we posit
that the equals sign does not happen in isolation; rather, it is
an element of mathematical sentences. The forms of equa-
tions are context-dependent, and equivalent mathematical
equations can have different symbolic forms. For example,the right-hand side of the kinematic equation v
f¼v0þat
can be interpreted as a “base þchange,” with the initial veloc-
ityv0modiﬁed by the change in velocity brought about by
acceleration. The topologically equivalent equation for net
force of a spring-gravity system Fnet¼/C0kx/C0mg, however,
is more likely to be interpreted as a “sum of parts,” with the
net force Fnetthe sum of the various forces, in this case,
gravity mgand spring kx.
This study extends previous work26and explores the con-
ceptual meaning behind mathematical formalisms. We ana-
lyze physics textbooks to investigate the disciplinary
interpretation of the equals sign. In doing so, we do not askhow the ¼understanding might be used to solve a problem,
but rather whether thematic categories arise when consider-
ing a physicist’s interpretation of the symbol. Our method
parallels to that of Burton and Morgan,27who studied pub-
lished journal articles in a variety of mathematical sub-ﬁelds
to identify a “natural language” in their epistemological
practice. We ﬁnd a shared focus in the work of Kress28in
striving to understand “what language [including, in our
case, math symbols] is doing and being made to do by peoplein speciﬁc situations in order to make particular meanings”
and agree with Burton and Morgan27that doing so may
“shed some light on the values and meanings of the
practices” of physicists in the pedagogical context.
