Italian National Agency for New Technologies Energy and Sustainable Economic Development,
C. R. Casaccia, via Anguillarese 301, 00123 Rome, Italy
(Received 21 December 2021; accepted 5 November 2022)
A few years ago, one of the former Editors of this journal launched “a call to action” (E. F. Taylor,
Am. J. Phys. 71, 423–425 (2003)) for a revision of teaching methods in physics in order to emphasize
the importance of the principle of least action. In response, we suggest the use of Hamilton’sprinciple of stationary action to introduce the Schr €odinger equation. When considering the geometric
interpretation of the Hamilton–Jacobi theory, the real part of the action Sdeﬁnes the phase of the
wave function exp iS=/C22hðÞ , and requiring the Hamilton–Jacobi wave function to obey wave-front
propagation (i.e., Re ðSÞis a constant of the motion) yields the Schr €odinger equation.
#2023 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0083015
I. INTRODUCTION
The wave mechanics formulation of quantum mechanics
relies on the Schr €odinger equation and the concept of the
wave function.1The Schr €odinger equation is ordinarily intro-
duced without providing much detail on its conceptual foun-
dations, which leads to some dissatisfaction.2Even
Schr €odinger’s original conjecture was heuristic.3Its weak-
ness was underlined by Feynman: “some of the arguments he
used were even false, but that does not matter; the onlyimportant thing is that the ultimate equation gives a correct
description of nature.”4In response, Feynman provided his
own derivation of the Schr €odinger equation that led him to
the path integral formulation of a quantum ﬁeld theory.5,6
Responding to the same stimulus and with the aim of a sound
derivation, others have come up with various proposals over
the last 50 years.2,7–23The approach presented here aims to
be both simple and rigorous; it is based on Hamilton’s princi-
ple of stationary action, where students encounter during
their studies of Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics.24
This formulation is conceptually similar to Schr €odinger’s
original proposal based on real-valued Hamilton’s functions3
and answers to “a call to action” by one of the formerEditors of this journal emphasizing the action’s paramountimportance in modern physics.
25To better contextualize our
purpose before going into the details, let us make some prelim-
inary remarks on typical approaches to develop Schr €odinger’s
picture of quantum mechanics.
