Interested In
References
The International Handbook of Physics Education Research: Special T opics
Physics as a Human Endeavor
The International Handbook of Physics Education Research: Special T opics 04 October 2023 22:55:56
A course on climate change and sustainable building designa)
Claire Akiko Marrache-Kikuchib)
Universit /C19e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, IJCLab, Orsay 91405, France
Guillaume Rouxc)
Universit /C19e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, LPTMS, Orsay 91405, France
Jean-Marie Fischbach and Bertrand Pilette
Magiste `re de Physique Fondamentale, Universit /C19e Paris-Saclay, Orsay 91405, France
(Received 3 December 2022; accepted 24 June 2023)
We present an intermediate-level course on sustainable physics, which combines lectures and
student projects. Sustainable physics concepts are progressively introduced through both a globaland a specialized perspective: climate change and building design. The lectures and hands-on
activities on both topics show how they share common concepts and provide complementary points
of view. Climate change mitigation and adaptation are touched on via student group projects,where they are asked to tackle a speciﬁc question of their choosing via reviews of the literature,
modeling, or experiments.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics
Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0137570
I. INTRODUCTION
Climate change and environmental issues in general are a
growing source of concern among the younger generation,
especially in high-income countries.1,2Like other students,
those studying physics show a strong appetite for coursesthat tackle these questions. Teaching about climate change is
challenging because there are more problems than solutions,
which generates anxiety among students.3Additionally,
many students get information on these topics from videos
or popular articles. These passive communication channelstend to leave students feeling helpless.
The community of researchers and educators also displays
a growing concern regarding climate change. In particular,
the physics community feels that it has the scientiﬁc back-
ground to tackle these problems, though it usually recognizes
that an interdisciplinary approach is critically needed.Instructors are often hesitant to teach topics that are outside
of their areas of expertise. Moreover, undergraduate-level
courses need to provide a bridge between high-school-level
and graduate-level education on energy and climate change.
Because physicists should, in principle, be able to teach allcourses at the bachelor’s level, we feel that there is a strong
motivation for developing general environmental physics
materials for and by non-experts but with a university-level
science content.
There are several ways to approach systemic issues. One
is the global approach, by discussing data and physicalmechanisms of global impact with regard to energy and cli-
mate. Another approach is to start from a focused topic, as
an example, and to progressively draw the threads toward all
the global issues to which it is connected.
In this paper, we describe an intermediate-level course for
physics students titled “Physics for sustainable devel-opment,” which tries to address these challenges in two main
ways. First, the structure of the course encourages active
learning. The lectures integrate hands-on tutorials and
ﬂipped classrooms; and the second half of the course
reserves time for group projects. We believe that this activeapproach to learning dispels anxiety. Second, we combine
teaching about global climate change problems withexplorations of a speciﬁc local solution: sustainable building
construction. This choice came from the expertise of one of
us and makes many relevant connections with global issues.
Architecture and housing also provide compelling topics for
projects. One of the pleasures and motivations for us is tobring scientiﬁc reasoning and physicists’ way of thinking
outside the typical physics realm. We show students that
physics provides them with skills to approach both complex
societal issues and everyday life situations.
Before describing the contents and the philosophy of this
course in more detail in Secs. 