INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| MAY 01 2023
A low-cost confocal microscope for the undergraduate lab 

A. Reguilon  
 ; W. Bethard  
 ; E. Brekke  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 404 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0128277
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A one-piece 3D printed flexure translation stage for open-source microscopy
Rev. Sci. Instrum.  (February 2016)
Microphone detection of the predissociation of iodine in a supersonic beam
Journal of Applied Physics  (May 1987)
In this issue: May 2023
American Journal of Physics  (May 2023) 04 October 2023 22:52:26
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
A low-cost confocal microscope for the undergraduate lab
A.Reguilon,a)W.Bethard,b)and E. Brekkec)
Department of Physics, St. Norbert College, De Pere, Wisconsin 54115
(Received 27 September 2022; accepted 6 January 2023)
We demonstrate a simple and cost-efﬁcient scanning confocal microscope setup for use in
advanced instructional physics laboratories. The setup is constructed from readily availablecommercial products, and the implementation of a 3D-printed ﬂexure stage allows for further cost
reduction and pedagogical opportunity. Experiments exploring the thickness of a microscope slide
and the surface of solid objects with height variation are presented as foundational components ofundergraduate laboratory projects and demonstrate the capabilities of a confocal microscope. This
system allows observation of key components of a confocal microscope, including depth
perception and data acquisition via transverse scanning, making it an excellent pedagogicalresource.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0128277
I. INTRODUCTION
The design and use of optical instruments is an area of
broad interest, appealing particularly to students at the inter-section of biological ﬁelds with physics and engineering.With the large number of undergraduate physicists interested
in careers in biomedical ﬁelds, a confocal microscope pro-
vides an excellent opportunity to see how physics principlesrelate to state-of-the-art equipment used for image formation.
The properties, advantages, and applications of confocal
microcopy have been carefully investigated in the biologicalcommunity.
1–3
While many undergraduate optics courses spend signiﬁ-
cant time on the ideas of optical instruments and traditional
microscopes, confocal microscopy is an important applica-
tion that is often absent from the student experience. Therehave been a variety of designs for homebuilt confocal micro-
scopes in the lab,4–9but these designs are often more focused
on the production of an image than on student understandingof the physics underlying the operation of the instrument.Previous versions were often either too expensive or left
essential elements hidden in commercial components, mak-
ing them nonideal for undergraduate pedagogy.
In this paper, we present a simple scanning confocal
microscope experiment, ideal for the undergraduate optics or
advanced instructional lab environment. Rather than being
designed to minimize its size or acquire images on par withcommercial confocal microscopes, our instructional setup isdesigned to clearly demonstrate the physics involved in the
image acquisition method and to make the optical compo-
nents easy to manipulate. Our setup provides an excellentsystem to illustrate scanning confocal microscopy and also
gives experience with the calibration of a data acquisition
process.
Our system is designed to be versatile with potential to
develop student experimental skills in the areas optical sys-
tems, electronics, and 3D printing. Projects can be adapted to
suit the context of an advanced lab setting, an optics or elec-tronics course, an independent student project, or a senior
thesis. In this paper, we outline an experimental process that
can be used as a whole or broken up into parts, depending onthe pedagogical purposes of the instructor. In the ﬁrst experi-
ment, a microscope slide is used to illustrate the ability of a
confocal setup to acquire depth information in a sample. A
second experiment involves using this setup to investigate
height variations of a solid material. Finally, either of theseexperiments can incorporate a 3D printed translation stage,
10
which allows integration of programming and electroniccontrol.
