Interested In
Gravomagnetism in special relativity
American Journal of Physics  (June 1988)
The two NUT -like solutions of Ernst equation
J. Math. Phys.  (April 2005)
Multiple-time constants of the motion for manifestly Poincaré-invariant Newtonian-like equations of motion
for point particles
J. Math. Phys.  (May 1997) 04 October 2023 23:10:21
How energy is conserved in Newtonian gravity
Vytenis M. Vasyli /C22unasa)
Max-Planck-Institut f €ur Sonnensystemforschung, 37077 G €ottingen, Germany
(Received 6 January 2021; accepted 8 March 2022)
The concept underlying conservation of energy in a force ﬁeld is that the work done by particles
moving against the force represents energy removed from particles and added to energy in theﬁeld. For electromagnetic ﬁelds and charged particles, the transfer of energy between charges and
local ﬁelds is described by Poynting’s theorem. However, a similar local model for gravitational
energy is not usually taught. In this paper, I derive the equations describing local conservation of
energy in Newtonian gravity, discuss the well-known non-uniqueness of various terms, and show
how comparison with Poynting’s theorem provides insight into conditions for physicalsigniﬁcance.
#2022 All article content, except where otherwise noted, is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009889
I. INTRODUCTION
Understanding and quantitatively describing conservation of
energy, an important part of learning physics, has been the sub-ject of renewed interest since the publication of Framework
for Science Education1and the associated development of
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS).2These reports
focused attention on a long-standing issue: Is energy associated
with force ﬁelds (e.g., electromagnetic, gravitational) better
represented in terms of potentials or of the ﬁelds them-selves?3,4Here, I discuss energy in purely classical (non-
relativistic) gravitational ﬁelds and show that it involves subtleaspects not always adequately treated in textbooks.
The work-energy theorem as usually stated applies to
complete isolated systems and must be generalized if we
deal with extended continuous media, including not only sol-
ids or ﬂuids but also gaseous systems described by localquantities that represent averages over small volumes con-taining many particles. As illustrated in the examplesdescribed later in this paper, the work that is done locally bythe ﬂow against gravity cannot, in general, be equated to the
local change of energy in the ﬁeld because energy can be
transported to other locations. To describe, this quantita-tively requires a local energy equation. This process is wellunderstood for electromagnetic energy, where Poynting’stheorem is the local energy equation, but an equation thatwould play the same role (although not necessarily having the
same mathematical form) in gravity as Poynting’s theorem
does in electromagnetism is hardly ever discussed explicitly.
The whole issue of how to describe changes of gravitational
energy within the classical Newtonian context seems to havereceived little attention. Textbooks sidestep the problem bydiscussing Newtonian gravitational energy only in the integralform for isolated systems,
5or they do not include gravity in
the discussion of energy conservation either because a relativ-
istically correct treatment is aimed at but the gravitationalterms have been formulated only in a nonrelativistic approxi-mation,
6or, on the contrary, because gravity is to be treated at
the general relativistic level and is purposely left out of thepreliminary Newtonian description,7or they simply do not
mention gravity at all in the discussion of energy.8My pur-
pose here is to try to ﬁll this gap in textbook coverage.
As ﬁnal revisions to this paper were being made, I learned
about another paper to be published in this journal that examinesa general description of gravitational ﬁelds, including energyﬂows, from a relativistic “gravitoelectromagnetic” perspectivewhere the ﬁeld equations are formulated in analogy to Maxwell’s
equations.
9In contrast, the approach taken in this paper is a classi-
cal Newtonian model where ﬁelds respond instantly to the motionof charges and masses. Readers are encouraged to examine bothpapers for a full picture of this issue.
As a simple example of the issues that arise when changes
in gravitational potential energy occur, consider water in apipe pushed up against gravity. This arrangement was dis-cussed as a thought experiment long ago by Bridgman,
10,11
and it is of current practical importance in the pumped-
storage system (Fig. 1) of some hydroelectric power plants.12
Two water reservoirs are located at different heights with
water being pumped from the lower to the upper. The workis done by the pump; where does the energy that is beingexpended to pump the water go? A simple answer is that theenergy expended in lifting a mass magainst Earth’s gravity
g
0to a mean height habove ground is stored in the mass m
as the change of its gravitational potential energy.13
However, this explanation is unsatisfactory if we think of theEarth as part of the system. As shown in the Appendix , the
change of gravitational potential energy is in fact dividedequally between the water and the Earth, even though thework done on the Earth is negligible.
14
