Interested In
Argand plot and conduction mechanism study of N+ implanted CR-39 polymer
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2019)
A step forward in kinesthetic activities for teaching kinematics in introductory physics
Am. J. Phys.  (October 2020)
Argand diagrams, harmonic oscillators, and record ‐ playing tonearms
American Journal of Physics  (April 1986) 04 October 2023 23:19:00
Waving arms around to teach quantum mechanics
Kelby T. Hahna)
College of Education, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-6507
Elizabeth Gireb)
Department of Physics, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-6507
(Received 5 October 2021; accepted 22 June 2022)
Kinesthetic (or embodied) representations help students build intuition and deep understanding of
concepts. This paper presents a series of kinesthetic activities for a spins-ﬁrst undergraduate
quantum mechanics course that supports students in reasoning and developing intuition about thecomplex-valued vectors of spin states. The arms representation, used in these activities, was
developed as a tangible representation of complex numbers: Students act as an Argand diagram,
using their left arm to represent numbers in the complex plane. The arms representation is versatileand can be expanded to depict complex-valued vectors with groups of students. This expansion
enables groups of students to represent quantum mechanical state vectors with their arms. We have
developed activities using the arms representation that parallel the progression of a spins-ﬁrstapproach by starting with complex numbers, then representing two- and three-state systems,
considering time-dependence, and, eventually, extending to approximate wavefunctions. Each
activity illustrates the complex nature of quantum states and provides a tangible manipulative fromwhich students can build intuition about quantum phenomena.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license
by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0073946
I. INTRODUCTION
A particularly challenging aspect of quantum mechanics is
the fundamental role complex numbers play in concepts,mathematics, and geometry.1,2In a spins-ﬁrst approach,3–5
also known as the Stern–Gerlach-ﬁrst approach,6students are
introduced to a ﬁnite Hilbert space for spin systems andexplore quantum mechanics through Stern–Gerlach experi-ments. This spins-ﬁrst approach is increasing in popularityand has a distinct advantage, compared to the wavefunction-or position-ﬁrst approach, of providing a conceptually richintroduction to the quantum postulates without requiring theadvanced mathematics needed to solve differential equations.
One noteworthy mathematical trade-off of the spins-ﬁrst
approach is that students work with the complex nature of
quantum states right at the start of the course when they rep-resent quantum spin states as complex-valued vectors.Matrix notation and bra-ket notation are used from the begin-ning. The traditional mathematics courses required forphysics majors (i.e., calculus, inﬁnite series and sequences,differential equations, and linear algebra) may not providestudents with the in-depth understanding of complex num-bers necessary to parse the signiﬁcance and geometry ofthese complex vector components.
7To help students build
intuition concerning these mathematical objects, many visu-alization options have been proposed.8–16Although these
visualizations support aspects of students’ reasoning, theymay impose additional burdens on (1) students (to coordinatemultiple representations for a single quantum state
8,9or to
parse complex nested diagrams14), (2) educators (to write,
maintain, and acclimate to new textbooks15,16), and (3) class-
room technology (to generate higher dimensional graphs,
which is resource-intensive10–13). Despite strengthening
student understanding, these visualizations still requirestudents to navigate coordinating between representationsand, in turn, further convolute the already abstract concept ofquantum states. In an effort to lessen the abstraction andhighlight key geometric relationships, the arms representation
was designed as a tangible metaphor for quantum states.
17
In this paper, we present the arms representation, a kines-
thetic, Argand-based representation for complex-valuedvectors, and the accompanying arms activities, a cluster ofclassroom exercises to support a spins-ﬁrst approach toteaching quantum mechanics. These are instructor-guided,
whole-class, active-engagement activities where students
stand up and use their left arms to represent complex num-bers. Arms was designed to develop student understandingwhile acting as a real-time formative assessment. Arms hasthe distinct advantage of not requiring specialized equipment
or technical training.
The arms representation is a kinesthetic representation
where each student embodies a complex number, and a
group of students collaboratively represents quantum states.Researchers have demonstrated that student learning inphysics can be enhanced by integrating classroom activitiesthat provide physical experience with physics content, acti-vate sensorimotor brain systems, or support tactile knowl-
edge building.
18–22Many kinesthetic physics activities focus
on kinematics broadly,20–28but some have also been devel-
oped for other or more focused physics concepts: linear andangular momentum,19,27projectile motion,28electric ﬁeld,29
centripetal force,30astronomy,31–33Newton’s second law,34
torque,35solar cells,36energy,37–39mechanics,40electricity
and magnetism,41wave dynamics,42and more.43,44
In addition to being kinesthetic, the arms activities are
social active-engagement activities that are often at oddswith students’ expectations of a quantum mechanics class. Ameta-analysis of 225 studies on STEM classrooms foundthat active-engagement activities, like arms, improve student
performance.
45Additionally, activities that students do not
expect to happen in class often lead to a ripple of giggles,and a review of 40 years of studies found that infusing clas-ses with positive humor bolsters engagement and affect.
46
Finally, unlike many of the aforementioned, primarily 2D,
778 Am. J. Phys. 90(10), October 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 778 04 October 2023 23:19:00
quantum mechanics representations, the arms representation
takes advantage of all three spatial dimensions, involves
multiple students, and uses time effectively to convey the
high dimensionality of the quantum systems.
In this paper, we present how we have used arms in a
junior-level, spins-ﬁrst quantum mechanics course to sup-
port an array of topics, starting with complex numbers,
then introducing two- and three-state systems, consideringtime-dependence, and, eventually, extending to approxi-
mate wavefunctions.47We begin with an introduction to
the arms representation (Sec. 