ISC, Departamento de F /C19ısica de Materiales, Universidad Complutense, Madrid E-28040, Spain
(Received 5 November 2022; accepted 2 June 2023)
Introductory textbooks in solid state physics present solvable models for illustrating the occurrence
of allowed bands and forbidden gaps in the energy spectrum of Bloch electrons. However, thequantum mechanical description of electrons in non-periodic solids, such as amorphous materials,
is beyond the scope of introductory courses because of its intrinsic complexity. The tight-binding
approximation can account for such a scenario by letting the atomic levels vary at random from
lattice site to site. We theoretically tackle the study of the average properties of the energy
spectrum by introducing a transfer matrix method that allows us to obtain closed expressions forthe so-called coherent potential. The coherent potential is energy-dependent and constant in space.
It replaces the actual atomic random potential, thus generating a periodic effective medium with
the same average properties as the non-periodic solid. We demonstrate that the average density ofstates can be calculated within this framework without relying on heavy mathematical machinery.
Thus, our approach is suitable for introductory courses in solid state physics and materials science.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0133701
I. INTRODUCTION
The band theory of solids introduced by Felix Bloch paved
the way to understand electron motion in crystals and theoccurrence of allowed bands and forbidden gaps in the energy
spectrum.1Shortly after Bloch’s theory appeared, Ralph
Kronig and William Penney considered a one-dimensionalmodel of a periodic potential to describe the electron dynam-
ics in an idealized crystal.2In its simplest form, the
Kronig–Penney model corresponds to the Schr €odinger equa-
tion for an electron moving in a periodic array of d-function
potentials. The resulting band structure is obtained exactly
without requiring extensive computations, so it is often usedin introductory textbooks to expose students to the main ideas
behind the band theory of crystalline solids.3–13
However, disordered solids and amorphous materials are
beyond the scope of introductory courses, because their con-
stituent atoms are not arranged in a periodic manner, so
Bloch’s theory is not applicable. In his celebrated paper“Absence of diffusion in certain random lattices,” Anderson
tackled the problem of an electron in a three-dimensional
random lattice.14Anderson established that the spatial ﬂuctu-
ations imposed on the wave function by the random potential
lead to its localization when disorder exceeds a critical mag-
nitude (see Ref. 15for a comprehensive review). This phe-
nomenon was named Anderson localization and led to his
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1977 for fundamental theoretical
investigations of the electronic structure of magnetic and dis-ordered systems. Although a general overview of Anderson
localization can be introduced to undergraduate students
with the aid of simple reasoning and without sophisticatedmathematical tools (see, e.g., Ref. 16and references therein),
the topic of electron states in noncrystalline solids is usually
omitted from solid state physics courses because of its obvi-ous complexity.
Anderson localization may occur when disorder enters via
a random spatial distribution of elastic scattering sites.
15The
tight-binding approximation can account for such a scenarioby assuming that the atomic levels vary randomly from
site to site of the atomic lattice (see Ref. 16for a brief intro-
duction to the tight-binding approximation in the context ofAnderson localization). Material systems where this model
applies include metal alloys, such as CuNi and AgPd, and
molecular systems. The scattering approach is the usual start-
ing point for studying the average properties of the energy
spectrum. In general, though, the conﬁgurationally averaged
spectral properties cannot be calculated exactly and various
approximations with different degrees of sophistication are
employed. Among them, the coherent potential approxima-
tion (CPA) stands out because it interpolates properly
between weak and strong scattering limits.17While several
advanced textbooks in solid state physics provide thorough
discussion of the CPA,11,18,19introductory textbooks
addressing this approach are scarce20because advanced
knowledge of a scattering theory is needed.17
In this paper, we bridge the gap between introductory and
advanced textbooks by considering a one-dimensional (1D)model of a random binary alloy within the tight-binding
approach. Disorder in 1D systems has its own peculiarities
not shared by 3D systems. For instance, in 1D any amount of
disorder results in the spatial localization of electrons,
although the spatial extent of the wave function can be larger
than the system size for weak disorder. This behavior is
rather independent of the model of disorder (compositional
or positional) and the distribution function of the random
variables of the model (binary, uniform, Gaussian). So, in
spite of the high impact of disorder, 1D systems are easier to
study than their 3D counterparts.
In the CPA, the average electron properties of the disor-
dered (non-periodic) solid are tackled by replacing the actual
atomic random potential by one that is energy-dependent
and the same at all lattice sites, usually referred to as the
coherent potential in the literature.
17The resulting effective
medium is periodic with the same average properties as the
non-periodic solid. In our approach, the coherent potential is
obtained in a self-consistent way by means of the well-
known transfer matrix method (TMM).21,22We demonstrate
that the average density of states can be calculated without
relying on advanced mathematical tools. Remarkably, thecoherent potential obtained in this way turns out to be the
same as the standard CPA result obtained by means of more
812 Am. J. Phys. 91(10), October 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 812 04 October 2023 22:58:08
complicated mathematical tools (Green’s functions
method).17Therefore, our approach could be of interest to
solid state physics instructors and students as it provides
them with all necessary tools to understand advanced text-
books17–19and articles23–25dealing with the electronic struc-
ture of disordered materials.
