INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| FEBRUARY 01 2023
Picometer measurements of strain coefficients by
quadrature interferometry and lock-in amplification 
Alec Nilson ; Kurt Wick
Am. J. Phys.  91, 142–152 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0102091
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A basic Michelson laser interferometer for the undergraduate teaching laboratory demonstrating picometer
sensitivity
Am. J. Phys.  (May 2015)
Picometer resolved nanoscale optomechanics of micro-droplet
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (December 2019)
Servopositioning with picometer resolution
Rev Sci Instrum  (January 1993) 04 October 2023 22:49:45
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
Picometer measurements of strain coefficients by quadrature
interferometry and lock-in amplification
Alec Nilsona)and Kurt Wickb)
School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455
(Received 7 June 2022; accepted 7 December 2022)
Modulated strain displacements were measured with a quadrature Michelson–Morley interferometer
employing polarization optics and two lock-in ampliﬁers to ﬁlter noise and thermal drift. The
advantages of the technique, its limitations, and estimates on the accuracy are discussed, includingan algorithm to correct for non-ideal components and non-linear effects. Instructions for the
construction and setup of the quadrature interferometer are provided. To test the interferometer,
the dynamic converse piezoelectric effect was used, and by modulating the electric ﬁeld across thesample, the d
14jj strain coefﬁcient for x-cut quartz was determined to be 0 :6660:04 pC =N, which is
within 1.5 standard deviations of the accepted standard. The measurements had a standard deviation
of 4.1 pm, resulting in standard errors as low as 5 fm/V after ﬁtting. #2023 Published under an exclusive
license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0102091
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the introduction of the ﬁrst optical interferometers,
advanced techniques1have been devised to improve their
sensitivity. One technique, the topic of this paper, is the
quadrature interferometer, which generates four distinct sig-
nals from the interference of superimposed waves with rela-tive phases of 90
/C14, 180/C14, and 270/C14. In practical quadrature
applications, only two of these signals are monitored withrelative phases of 90
/C14. This additional information provides
high accuracy without the need for other techniques such aselectromechanical feedback to maintain a constant phaserelationship.
1It also allows for unambiguous directional
information about the interferometer’s pathlength changes.
The interferometer generates its quadrature outputs by uti-
lizing polarization optics. It consists of a traditionalMichelson–Morley interferometer with four additional opti-cal components: A circular polarizer, a linear polarizer, apolarizing beam splitter, and an additional detector for the90
/C14out-of-phase signal. We have developed this design from
more complex measurement systems2,3not only to simplify
the experimental setup and alignment process but also
because it only involves the addition of linearly and circu-
larly polarized light, making it easier to explain.
Relying only on polarization optics as opposed to, for
example, mechanical feedback1or frequency shifting with
AO cells4makes this interferometer design well suited to
observe transients, because its response time is only limitedby the optical detector electronics. In our advanced lab, wehave explored the time evolution of compression waves trav-
elling at speeds of 5000 m/s in stainless steel rods.5Using a
digital oscilloscope to record the voltages from the two
detectors at sampling rates of 107samples per second allows
students to study the resulting displacements with just sixlines of code6with an accuracy of 1 nm or better.
Recently, we have been intrigued by the piezoelectric
effect in biological samples, speciﬁcally bones,7,8and
wood.9,10While the former has lately received attention,
because it is believed that exercise and bone growth andhealing might be directly linked to the piezoelectriceffect,
11,12the latter is a topic of little exploration. In both
cases, the piezoelectric effect is extremely small, resulting indisplacements of less than 1 pm/V when a voltage is applied
across the samples, putting it beyond the resolution of our
simple (DC) detection technique. We have determined thatthe limiting factor was the dominance of 1/f noise, i.e., thedrift in the measurements due to slow temperature changesin the room causing thermal expansion and contraction ofthe interferometer’s pathlength.
The solution to this problem was inspired by Reichert,
13
who in response to the recent discoveries by LIGO ques-
tioned how small a displacement one could measure in anadvanced undergraduate lab, speciﬁcally if one paired inter-ferometry with a noise suppression technique. One usefulmethod is phase sensitive lock-in ampliﬁcation,
14,15which
detects an AC signal at a speciﬁc frequency while rejecting
all other signals, similar to tuning a radio receiver to the spe-ciﬁc frequency of a radio station. In our experiment, the
142 Am. J. Phys. 91(2), February 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 142 04 October 2023 22:49:45
“radio” signal is generated by applying an AC modulation
voltage across a piezoelectric sample, resulting in distortionsproportional to the applied electric ﬁeld. Attaching one ofthe interferometer’s mirrors to one side of the constrainedsample allows us to receive this signal from the interferome-ter’s detectors with our “radios,” consisting of two commer-cially available lock-in ampliﬁers (LIAs), each measuringthe amplitude and phase of the AC modulation at the speciﬁcmodulation frequency. While these readings are directly pro-portional to the amplitude of the sample’s distortion, theyalso depend on the phase difference of the two arms.Because the quadrature interferometer’s signals are exactly90
/C14out of phase with each other, a vector addition of the two
lock-in ampliﬁer signals yields a modulation amplitude thatis independent of the overall intensity.
We have applied this technique in our advanced lab and
measured the piezoelectric effect in wood and bone.6As con-
ﬁrmation, we present the results for a quartz sample sincestandard values exist for its piezoelectricity.16,17Even with
thermal drifts on the order of nanometers during the dataacquisition period, we were able to measure displacementsdue to shear strains with a standard deviation of 4.1 pm or1/150 000 of the wavelength of the interferometer’s lightsource. We determined the piezoelectric constant of ourquartz sample to within 1.5 standard deviations of itsaccepted value with the main uncertainty being the dimen-sions of the sample and the location of the interferometer’sbeam with respect to it.
In addition to describing the experimental setup, we derive
the relevant equations for a quadrature interferometer start-ing with the simple Michelson–Morley interferometer. Wepresent three different methods to analyze the data withincreasing complexity and accuracy, and we provide esti-mates of the accuracy of this technique and its limitations.
