INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| APRIL 01 2023
An easier-to-align Hong–Ou–Mandel interference
demonstration 
Nicholas S. DiBrita ; Enrique J. Galvez
Am. J. Phys.  91, 307–315 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.01 19906
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Hong–Ou–Mandel sensing via superradiant coupling of discrete fluorescent emitters
AVS Quantum Sci.  (July 2022)
The Hong–Ou–Mandel interferometer: A new procedure for alignment
Rev. Sci. Instrum.  (March 2009)
Entanglement distillation by Hong-Ou-Mandel interference with orbital angular momentum states
APL Photonics  (January 2019) 04 October 2023 22:51:30
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
An easier-to-align Hong–Ou–Mandel interference demonstration
Nicholas S. DiBritaa)and Enrique J. Galvezb)
Department of Physics, Colgate University, Hamilton, New York 13346
(Received 10 August 2022; accepted 17 January 2023)
The Hong–Ou–Mandel interference experiment is a fundamental demonstration of nonclassical
interference and a basis for many investigations of quantum information. This experiment involvesthe interference of two photons reaching a symmetric beamsplitter. When the photons are made
indistinguishable in all possible ways, an interference of quantum amplitudes results in both
photons always leaving the same beamsplitter output port. Thus, a scan of distinguishableparameters, such as the arrival time difference of the photons reaching the beamsplitter, produces a
dip in the coincidences measured at the outputs of the beamsplitter. The main challenge for its
implementation as an undergraduate laboratory is the alignment of the photon paths at thebeamsplitter. We overcome this difﬁculty by using a pre-aligned commercial ﬁber-coupled
beamsplitter. In addition, we use waveplates to vary the distinguishability of the photons by their
state of polarization. We present a theoretical description at the introductory quantum mechanicslevel of the two types of experiments, plus a discussion of the apparatus alignment and list of parts
needed.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0119906
I. INTRODUCTION
In 1987, Hong, Ou, and Mandel reported on one of the
most consequential experiments in quantum optics.1It is an
experiment that demonstrates the ensuing quantum interfer-ence of two properly prepared photons after each arrives sepa-rately at an adjacent input port of a symmetric beamsplitter.When all of the properties of the two photons are identical, a
striking phenomenon appears: the two photons always exit
together at the same output port of the beamsplitter and neverexit at separate output ports. This effect is a purely nonclassi-cal phenomenon. The proper way to understand it is from aquantum-mechanical perspective, where the amplitudes for
the various possibilities interfere. This result mimics a form of
interaction between photons, but one that is solely due toquantum effects, similar to the exchange interaction of elec-trons in atoms. This quantum interaction has been used for anumber of purposes,
2such as entanglement,3,4entanglement
swapping,5teleportation,6implementation of CNOT gates,7
and ultimately, quantum computing with photons.8
The essence of the Hong–Ou–Mandel (HOM) interference
phenomenon is shown in Fig. 1. When two photons arrive
separately at adjacent input ports of a beamsplitter, there arefour possible outcomes. Either the two photons exit togetherout of the same output port in one of two possible ways, as
shown in Figs. 1(a)and1(b), or they exit out of separate ports
in one of two possible ways, as shown in Figs. 1(c) and1(d).Following Ref. 9, consider the event when both photons exit
out of separate output ports of the beamsplitter. If the photonsare indistinguishable, the probability for the event is thesquare of the sum of the probability amplitudes for each pos-sibility considered separately. If the possibilities are distin-guishable, then the probability of the event is the sum of the
probabilities of the possibilities.
Now assume the beamsplitter to be a symmetric one, i.e.,
with equal probabilities to transmit and reﬂect light, and equalamplitudes for reﬂection and transmission from either side ofthe beamsplitter. It is common to call the probability amplitudesfor transmission and reﬂection tandr, respectively. The abso-
lute value for both tandrhas to be 1 =ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
, so that the probability
of transmission and reﬂection is 1 =2i ne a c hc a s e .H o w e v e r ,t o
conserve energy, or equivalently, probability, the transmissionand reﬂection amplitudes have to be out of phase by p=2f o rt h e
case of the symmetric beamsplitter.
10,11It is common to attach
this phase to the reﬂection amplitude, so r¼expðip=2Þ=ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
¼i=ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
andt¼1=ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
. The probability amplitude that both
photons come out of separate output ports of the beamspl itter
has two terms: when both transmit, it is tt¼1=2[ F i g . 1(c)];
and both reﬂect, it is rr¼/C01=2[ F i g . 1(d)]. The probability for
the event is then
Pind¼jttþrrj2¼0: (1)
That is, the two possibilities interfere destructively.
307 Am. J. Phys. 91(4), April 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 307 04 October 2023 22:51:30
If the photons are distinguishable, such as when they
arrive at the beamsplitter at distinguishable different times,
then the probability is
Pdis¼jttj2þjrrj2¼1=2: (2)
Distinguishable different times mean that a measurement of
the two arrival times of the photons can be used to distinguishbetween the two possibilities. Other distinguishing attributes
are the photons’ polarization, energy, or spatial mode.
We note that the previous analysis applies to bosons, like
the photon. For fermions (for example, electrons), the ampli-tude rule of Eq. (1)is not a sum but a difference of the two
probability amplitudes.
9This fact is due to the exchange
symmetry of indistinguishable fermions, which unlike
bosons, cannot occupy the same state (i.e., both fermionshaving the same momentum). Thus, in the HOM experi-
ments with electrons,12the probability of Eq. (1)is 1.
Feynman explains the distinction between bosons and fer-mions with a similar type of experiment, of identical par-ticles in a head-on collision.
9This phenomenon is more
formally described in terms of the symmetry of the two-
particle wavefunction, presented in Sec. 