Interested In
Acoustic data fusion devoted to underwater vegetation mapping
J Acoust Soc Am  (May 2008)
Paramagnetic properties of covalently linked mixed valence chromium complexes in polymers
Journal of Applied Physics  (May 2004)
The interaction function and lattice duals
J. Math. Phys.  (August 2008) 04 October 2023 23:03:54
General formalism for calculating the thermal efficiency
of thermodynamic cycles defined in a p–Vdiagram
Viktor K€onyea)
Institute for Theoretical Solid State Physics, IFW Dresden and W €urzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence
ct.qmat, Helmholtzstr. 20, 01069 Dresden, Germany
J/C19ozsef Csertib)
Department of Physics of Complex Systems, E €otv€os Lor /C19and University, H-1117 Budapest,
P/C19azm/C19any P /C19eter s /C19et/C19any 1/A, Hungary
(Received 19 July 2021; accepted 22 November 2021)
We develop a general method for calculating the thermal efﬁciency of arbitrary thermodynamic
cycles deﬁned in the pressure-volume ( p–V) diagram. To demonstrate how effective our approach
is, we calculate the thermal efﬁciency of ideal gas engines for a few non-trivial cycles in the p–V
diagram, including a circular shape, a heart shape, a cycloid of Ceva, and a star-shaped curve. We
determine the segments along the cycle where heat is absorbed or released from the heat engine.
Our method can be applied to any gas model, and, as an example, we present the results for the vander Waals gas.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0064010
I. INTRODUCTION
Calculating the efﬁciency of thermodynamic cycles is a
central issue in practical applications. Moreover, when teach-ing, the basic concepts of thermodynamics can be introduced
very efﬁciently through calculations of energy efﬁciency. In
most textbook examples,1–3the thermodynamic cycles in the
pressure-volume ( p–V) diagram include only four types of
processes: isothermal (constant temperature), isochoric (con-
stant volume), isobaric (constant pressure), and adiabatic
(heat-insulated system). Engines including such cycles, likethe Carnot, Otto, Brayton (or Joule), Diesel, Stirling, Rankine,and Sargent cycles, are well known in the literature. To calcu-late the exchanged heat and work done for these systems, it isassumed that all processes are idealized; i.e., they are quasi-static and reversible, and there is no friction, turbulence, orheat loss. The common feature in the four above-mentionedtypes of idealized processes is that the exchanged heat and the
work done can be calculated analytically for a gas character-
ized by its equation of state and its internal energy.
The calculation of the speciﬁc heat and of the thermal efﬁ-
ciency for unconventional thermodynamic processes (which
deviate from the four special ones mentioned above) hasbeen a frequently studied issue in the literature. For example,the speciﬁc heat has been calculated for gases in an arbitraryprocess in Ref. 4and for the ideal gas along an elliptical p–V
cycle in Ref. 5. Similarly, to calculate the thermal efﬁciency,
the use of logarithmic plots of the p–Vdiagram has been sug-
gested in Ref. 6. The thermal efﬁciency has been calculated
for cycles in the p–Vdiagram involving diagonal processes
with negative slope,
7–11parabolic processes,10circular pro-
cesses,12an unconventional lobe,13and an alternative ther-
modynamic cycle for the Stirling machine.14
Extending the calculation of the thermal efﬁciency to gen-
eral cycles then is a natural development. Indeed, for uncon-ventional processes, the calculation of the efﬁciency is notobvious at all since it is rather difﬁcult to calculate theabsorbed and released heat during the cycle. In principle,one needs to locate the segments of the cycle where heat isabsorbed or released by the ﬂuid. These segments are sepa-rated by points at which the adiabatic curves are tangent tothe curve representing the given cycle.
11In most cases, suchcalculations cannot be performed analytically. This problem
can be complicated even in the simple case of a circularprocess.12
To avoid this problem, in this work, we present a general
formalism for calculating the thermal efﬁciency for arbitrarycycles parametrized in the p–Vdiagram. Figure 1shows
such an example in which the cycle is a heart-shaped curve.
Although such a heat engine is probably not realistic, ourgeneral approach could be useful in practice and may pro-vide a didactically useful example for teaching the calcula-tion of thermal efﬁciency as well.
Our formalism is quite versatile; it is valid for all gases
provided their equation of state and their internal energy are
known. We shall calculate the thermal efﬁciency both forideal gas and for the van der Waals gas. From the calcula-tion, we shall identify the segments of the p–Vdiagram,
where heat is absorbed or released from the heat engine.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 