IL 01 2022
Energy-mass equivalence from Maxwell equations 
Alejandro Perez ; Salvatore Ribisi
Am. J. Phys.  90, 305–313 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009156
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Maxwell's Electrostatics
American Journal of Physics  (February 1968)
Unmasking Maxwell’ s Demon
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2002)
Whatever happened to Maxwell?
American Journal of Physics  (July 1987) 04 October 2023 23:07:08
Energy-mass equivalence from Maxwell equations
Alejandro Pereza)and Salvatore Ribisib)
Aix Marseille Univ, Universit /C19e de Toulon, CNRS, CPT, 13000 Marseille, France
(Received 28 January 2021; accepted 2 December 2021)
The celebrated mass-energy equivalence relation, E¼mc2, was derived by Einstein using thought
experiments involving the kinematics of the emission of light and the relativity principle. Textbookderivations often follow paths similar to Einstein’s or analyze the kinematics of particle collisions
in different inertial frames. In such derivations, the direct dynamical link with fundamental ﬁelds
describing matter (e.g., Maxwell theory or other) is overshadowed. Here, we show that the formula
can be derived directly from the dynamical equations of electromagnetic energy conﬁned in a box
(which can be thought of as a toy model of a composite particle). The mass-energy equivalencerelation follows from the inertia or (taking the equivalence principle for granted) weight of
conﬁned radiation. The present derivation offers an interesting pedagogical perspective on the
formula, provides a simple toy model for the origin of mass, and can serve as a bridge to generalrelativity.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009156
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the striking results of special relativity1is the
implication of an equivalence between the concepts of inertia
and energy. In one of his founding papers,2Einstein arrived
at the mass-energy equivalence by showing that a body emit-
ting an energy Evia electromagnetic radiation will see its
mass decreased by an amount E=c2. As compelling as it is,
Einstein was not completely satisﬁed and spent the next dec-
ades3–7on a quest for a better proof. Remarkably, the idea
that energy should be associated with a mass was already
present in the literature prior to Einstein’s papers even
though such accounts lacked the conceptual clarity that the
relativity framework provides. In this respect, it is important
to note Poincar /C19e’s derivation using electromagnetic momen-
tum conservation8,9and Hasenohrl’s deduction that a cavity
full of radiation should have a mass m¼4=3ðE=c2Þ10(see
Ref. 11for a historical account).
Today, textbooks give several different derivations, which
are chosen for their simplicity. In Jackson’s classic text-
book,12the equivalence is ﬁrst found by equating the force
on a charged particle with its four-momentum variation. A
second derivation requires the kinematics of colliding par-
ticles (seen in different inertial frames) to be consistent with
the relativity principle. In Ref. 13, one ﬁnds the reconstruc-
tion of Einstein’s argument in Ref. 14, where electromag-
netic radiation plays a central role. Finally, perhaps the
simplest (yet the most formal) derivation starts from the
(relativistic) free particle action15
SxðtÞ½/C138 ¼ /C0 mcð
dtﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jgl/C23_xl_x/C23jq
; (1)
whose non-relativistic limit justiﬁes the non-relativistic
Lagrangian L¼m_x2=2, and in two lines of analysis produces
the canonical Hamiltonian energy eðvÞ¼mc2=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0v2=c2p/C16/C17
witheð0Þ¼mc2.
Ever since Einstein, the interest in mass-energy equiva-
lence has not faded. Alternative derivations have been pro-
posed,16and some of which tried to move away from the
framework of special relativity and instead used concepts of
quantum mechanics17to show how the validity of thisequivalence goes beyond electromagnetism. All these deri-
vations are important and insightful in their own way, and
those found in standard textbooks remain perhaps the sim-plest path to E
0¼mc2. However, none of the modern
accounts make the link between pure energy and mass
dynamically explicit. They hide an important aspect that iscentral in the generalization of special relativity to general
relativity.
The derivation proposed here is complementary to the
standard approaches. In addition, our derivation presents anexplicit link between the ﬁeld equations of a massless theory
and the emergent mass of its conﬁned radiation. In this sense,
it is reminiscent of the old approaches of Poincar /C19e and
Hasen €ohrl. The derivation relies strongly on the notion of
stress-energy-momentum tensor of matter and the covariantinterpretation of its physical content. The exercise paves the
way for the understanding of the energy momentum tensor
as the source of gravity in general relativity and serves alsoas an introduction to the mathematics that is central to the
deﬁnition of the theory.
We will consider radiation conﬁned in an idealized box,
and we will show that this radiation confers an inertial massm¼e=c
2to the box, where eis its energy content. We ﬁrst
consider the radiation to be Maxwell electromagnetic ﬁelds,
which strengthen the idea that special relativity is entirelyencoded in the properties of electromagnetism. (This was the
perspective adopted by Einstein in 1905.) As our derivation
relies entirely on the coordinate independence of the ﬁeld
equations and the conservation of the energy-momentum
tensor of the matter ﬁelds, the result is expected to be validfor any generally covariant matter model. As an additional
example, we show that the construction also works for a
massless scalar ﬁeld.
The idealized box conﬁning the radiation can in turn be
thought of as a simple model of a composite particle (such as
a proton or a neutron): from modern computations
18in quan-
tum chromodynamics (QCD), we know that 99% of the massof a proton comes from the energy of the conﬁned gluon-
quark radiation while only the remaining 1% is due to the
contribution of the rest mass of the quarks (see, for instance,Refs. 19–21 for pedagogical discussions). The QCD conﬁne-
ment potential is replaced in our model by the box and the
305 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 305 04 October 2023 23:07:08
boundary conditions that require the ﬁelds to vanish at its
walls. To render the analogy more precise, it is worth men-
tioning that the idea of deﬁning nucleons as conﬁned radia-
tion received a lot of attention in the 1970s. One popular
representation is the so-called “MIT bag model”22,23
designed to describe color conﬁnement in terms of (Yang-
Mills) ﬁelds restricted to vanish outside of a suitable space
region. Of course, such (quantum ﬁeld theoretical) models
were devised to calculate the mass spectrum of particles in
the standard model and not to establish the equivalencebetween mass and energy, which was simply assumed.
Our derivation could not realistically have replaced the
historical one, because it makes use of the physical interpre-
tation of the energy-momentum tensor (even though it is pre-
sent in the literature on Maxwell ﬁelds, it only became
central after the development of relativity) and the general
covariance of the relativistic ﬁeld equations (which also
emerged from general relativity). Nonetheless, all the mathe-
matical ingredients and physical interpretation were arguably
available in the context of Maxwell electromagnetism. Yetthe derivation we propose is straightforward only once mod-
ern tools and covariant methods are used. We hope that this
paper will present students with an alternative (perhaps tech-
nically more advanced) pedagogical perspective of both
technical interest and conceptual value.
This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. 