Interested In
Phase matching retracing behavior for second harmonic generation in LiB 3O5 crystal
Journal of Applied Physics  (February 1993)
Optical ray retracing of Brillouin backscatter from a nonisothermal plasma
Physics of Fluids  (April 1981)
Phase ‐ matching retracing behavior: New features in LiB 3O5
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (September 1991) 04 October 2023 23:19:04
Maxwell’s color box: Retracing the path of color matching experiments
Valentina Roberti,a)Boris Kalinic, Tiziana Cesca, Luca Bacci, and Giulio Peruzzib)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Padua, Via Marzolo, 8-35131 Padova, Italy
(Received 9 February 2022; accepted 8 July 2022)
In his 1860 paper On the theory of compound colours , James Clerk Maxwell described an
instrument used to obtain a direct comparison between daylight and a mixture of three selectedspectral colors. This investigation was part of Maxwell’s study of human color vision, color
perception, and color representation, and it encompasses his main achievements in the ﬁeld. The
working principle underlying this device provided the basis from which color diagrams have been
derived, beginning with the standard chromaticity diagram proposed by the International
Commission on Illumination in 1931. We describe a reconstruction of Maxwell’s original versionof the color box. Constructing and analyzing data obtained with such a replica could serve as a
semester project for advanced optics students.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0087786
I. INTRODUCTION
James Clerk Maxwell’s pioneering work on the nature of
color and the phenomenon of color vision opened the door tomodern color theory and colorimetry. The aim of this paperis to describe a reproduction of Maxwell’s original colorbox, an instrument that allows direct comparison, in bothcolor and intensity, of white light with a mixture of spectralcolors. The working principle underlying this device hasbeen of crucial importance for the advance of color sciencein that it provided the basis for all subsequent color matchinginvestigations.
We consider this reconstruction of Maxwell’s color box to
be an example of the experimental history of science,wherein historical experiments are reconstructed with mod-ern equipment or with original coeval materials.
1Since sim-
ply studying original texts rarely provides the informationrequired to fully comprehend historical experiments, recon-structions facilitate clearer understanding of both Maxwell’swritings and drawings. This allowed us to uncover signiﬁ-cant aspects of the experimental technique and the method ofobservations, which were not made explicit in the originaltext.
The outline of this paper is as follows: Sec. 