Interested In
Narrow pass ‐ band high power TWT amplifier
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 1992)
Beno Gutenberg
Physics T oday  (March 1960)
Deviations from the Gutenberg–Richter law on account of a random distribution of block sizes
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2015) 04 October 2023 23:11:56
Earthquake size: An example of a statistical distribution that lacks a
well-defined mean
Takuya Okabe
Graduate School of Integrated Science and Technology, Shizuoka University, 3-5-1 Johoku,
Hamamatsu 432-8561, Japan
JinY oshimura
Graduate School of Integrated Science and Technology, Shizuoka University, 3-5-1 Johoku,
Hamamatsu 432-8561, Japan; Department of International Health, Institute of Tropical Medicine, NagasakiUniversity, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan; Department of Environmental and Forest Biology, State University of
New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse, New York 13210; Marine Biosystems
Research Center, Chiba University, Uchiura, Kamogawa, Chiba 299-5502, Japan; University Museum, the
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan; and Department of Biological Science, Tokyo
Metropolitan University, Hachioji, Tokyo, 192-0397, Japan
(Received 19 January 2021; accepted 4 April 2022)
Power-law distributions are observed to describe many physical phenomena with remarkable
accuracy. In some cases, the distribution gives no indication of a cutoff in the tail, which posesinteresting theoretical problems, because its average is then inﬁnite. It is also known that the
averages of samples of such data do not approach a normal distribution, even if the sample size
increases. These problems have previously been studied in the context of random walks. Here, wepresent another example in which the sample average increases with the sample size. In the
Gutenberg–Richter law for earthquakes, we show that the cumulative energy released by
earthquakes grows faster than linearly with time. Here, increasing the time span of observationcorresponds to increasing the sample size. While the mean of released energy is not well deﬁned,
its distribution obeys a non-trivial scaling law.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0010261
I. INTRODUCTION
Very diverse physical, biological, and social phenomena
display distributions that obey a power law with remarkable
accuracy and over several orders of magnitude.1In some
cases, the power law holds true without any sign of a cutoff,
which would indicate that the distribution has no ﬁnite mean.
From a purely theoretical perspective, theorems and limit dis-
tributions for such cases are known in mathematics.2–5From
a practical or physical standpoint, however, measurable impli-
cations caused by the peculiar properties of power law distri-
butions have attracted little attention until recently.6The
mathematics of probability distributions with inﬁnite means
was investigated by Paul L /C19evy in the 1930s.2,4Several deca-
des later, L /C19evy’s results were applied in physics to explain
phenomena related to random walks, e.g., anomalous diffu-
sion in disordered conductors.7–10 ,15In recent years, this sub-
ject has become popular and found applications to numerousphysical systems from laser cooling to aging.11–14
The absence of a well-deﬁned average requires that the
probability of a variable xbehaves as PðxÞ/1=ðx1þaÞwith
a>0 in the limit of x!1 . In laser cooling of atomic
gases, for instance, the lifetime of atoms in a given momen-
tum state follows this type of distribution.14A divergent life-
time signiﬁes that the system is experimentally unable to
reach a steady state despite the experimental time scale being
signiﬁcantly larger than the microscopic one.
Another example is the law of large numbers. For the sum
SNofNindependent and identically distributed random vari-
ables, it is often taken for granted that the average SN=N
approaches a ﬁnite value /C22lasNincreases. This is the (weak)
law of large numbers, which underlies the inference in phys-
ics experiments that the true value of the observable is /C22l.I fthe variable has a ﬁnite variance, r2, then the sum SN
approaches the normal distribution with mean N/C22land vari-
ance Nr2. This is the central limit theorem.
However, it is possible to imagine anomalous cases for
which the limit /C22ldoes not exist or is ill-deﬁned. To deal
with these phenomena, the usual method, which underliesthe mean ﬁeld theory, of considering the average value of aphysical observable separately from its ﬂuctuations is of nohelp. L /C19evy derived the probability distribution for such cases
in terms of the Fourier transform of the probability densityfunction.
2Phenomena such as random jumps of a state vari-
able, e.g., position or displacement in a random walk, arenatural applications of L /C19evy’s results. Atomic momentum in
subrecoil laser cooling is also a good example.14However,
practical applications can also be found elsewhere in entirelydifferent contexts.
In the eighteenth century, Nicolas Bernoulli posed a para-
doxical problem now known as the St. Petersburg paradox.16
It is based on a theoretical lottery game that leads to a ran-dom variable with inﬁnite average. This game entails ﬂip-ping a coin. If heads comes up in the ﬁrst toss, the playerwins one coin. If tails comes up, the player is allowed to ﬂipthe coin again, until heads comes up. The prize 2
Nis deter-
mined by the number Nof tails the player has drawn before
obtaining a heads. The paradox is that the mean winning(1/C2
1
2þ22/C21
4þ23/C21
8þ/C1/C1/C1 ) is inﬁnite, so that we cannot
determine a fair ante to enter the game, and the bankershould have inﬁnite resources to cover the expected loss.
Feller took up this problem in a classic book on probability
theory,4where he showed that, when the game is repeated n
times, the accumulated winning converges to nlog2nasn
increases.5This superlinear behavior implies that the distri-
bution does not have a ﬁnite mean, since a ﬁnite mean would
501 Am. J. Phys. 90(7), July 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 501 04 October 2023 23:11:56
require the accumulated sum to vary linearly with n. Thus,
the absence of a well-deﬁned mean does not imply theabsence of any rule. Instead, for a large number of games,the probability distribution of the overall winning should dis-
play the universal scaling property expected from L /C19evy’s
mathematical results.
2This point hints at possible physical
systems that exhibit a distribution without a ﬁnite mean. Inthis paper, we present a particular example of such a system:the power law distribution of earthquakes.
