Interested In
Clarification of basic concepts for electromagnetic interference shielding ef fectiveness
J. Appl. Phys.  (December 2021)
MITICA intermediate electrostatic shield: Concept design, development, and first experimental tests
identification
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2018)
RSMASS ‐ D: Reactor and shield mass minimization models
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 1991) 04 October 2023 23:16:02
The basic concepts determining electromagnetic shielding
Guy A. E. Vandenboscha)
Department of Electrical Engineering, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10,
3001 Leuven, Belgium
(Received 3 February 2022; accepted 28 June 2022)
Shielding involves much more than just putting a conductive screen in between an emitting source
and a susceptible device. Starting from Maxwell’s equations, the concept of electromagnetic
shielding is formally explained. The physical working mechanisms behind the two basic forms ofshielding, electric ﬁeld and magnetic ﬁeld shielding, are given, and the link between them at higher
frequencies is clariﬁed. Several aspects, like the effect of gridding or weaving a shield, the effect of
the ﬁnite size of a shield, and the penetration through the metal of a shield, are discussed based onvery simple canonical shielding topologies that can be solved analytically. Although the classical
paradigm to explain shielding based on the notions of skin depth and eddy current is not followed,
conceptual links with this classical paradigm are explained.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0087295
I. INTRODUCTION
In the minds of most scientists and engineers, electromag-
netic shielding involves putting an electromagnetic screen,
i.e., a shield, between a source of electromagnetic waves and
a susceptible device. This technique is widespread amongexperimentalists, technicians, and designers of equipmentand measurement setups. Electromagnetic shielding is alsoimportant in life outside of the laboratory. For example, thesteel reinforcement of concrete walls and ﬂoors partially
shields the inside of buildings from the mobile phone wire-
less networks deployed outside, which explains the typicallylower signal level indoors. Also, shielding is one of the mostbasic drivers of the EMC industry.
1,2EMC (ElectroMagnetic
Compatibility) is the study of the simultaneous functioningof electric and/or electronic devices in each other’s
neighborhood.
Electromagnetic shielding is commonly taught in physics
and engineering curricula. At higher frequencies, the conceptof both electric and magnetic shielding is often explainedstarting from the conﬁguration involving a plane wave inci-dent on a metal screen.
3,4In some cases, this may lead to
incorrect interpretations as pointed out by Fahy et al.5
Solving Maxwell’s equations for this simple geometry yields
the coefﬁcients of reﬂection and transmission. It is easilyshown that for good metal screens, the reﬂection is veryhigh, and the transmission is very low, leading to goodshielding properties. Although this approach is educationally
sensible, unfortunately it does not give the student a thor-
ough understanding of many aspects that are crucial in thepractical application of shielding when designing electronicsystems. In the simple “plane wave understanding” of shield-ing, many questions are completely left unanswered.Questions as “Is there a difference in behavior of a screen at
low and high frequencies?,” “Does shielding work only for
two-dimensional screens?,” “How large is the spatial zoneshielded by a screen?,” “Is electric and magnetic shieldingalways the same, as in this simple plane wave case?” cannotbe answered based solely on the plane wave explanation.
At lower frequencies, the concept of eddy currents is used
mainly to explain magnetic shielding.
6Eddy currents are
electric currents ﬂowing in loops within conductors due to achanging magnetic ﬁeld in the conductors. They aregoverned by Faraday’s law of induction. Shielding is then
based on the fact that this current swirls in such a way as tocreate an induced magnetic ﬁeld that opposes the phenome-
non that created it, resulting in a certain level of magnetic
shielding. For the novice, this low-frequency paradigminvokes other questions: “Does this mechanism also generateelectric shielding?,” “What is the relation between the inci-
dent and reﬂected (plane) wave description and the eddy cur-
rent description?,” etc.
The result is that the novice physicist or engineer who is
confronted with an electromagnetic interference problem
may just try to put “some” screen in between the source and
the “problematic” device in the hope that the ﬁeld levels willbe reduced sufﬁciently in order to solve the problem.
In this paper, the basic working mechanisms of electromag-
netic shielding are explained based on the laws of electromag-
netism. The presentation is completely different from what istraditionally taught and leads to a much more robust under-standing of the basic phenomena involved. The approach fol-
lowed in this paper allows correct assessment of many
practical situations: Those where shielding is already occur-ring or where it has to be applied in order to solve a practical
interference problem. Shielding geometries that are discussed
include conducting wires, woven shields, and solid screens,and both penetration through and diffraction around shields
are considered. Concrete calculations are based on very sim-
ple topologies that can be solved analytically: the simplestraight wire, a raster of parallel straight wires, and a conduct-ing half plane. To the knowledge of the author, the paradigm
followed in this paper has never been published before. Most
didactic papers on the topic consider electrostatic casesonly.
7–9However, electrostatic shielding is not as important
in daily life compared to screening of non-zero frequency
ﬁelds. Readers looking for more advanced treatments of prac-tical shielding problems may wish to consult the IEEE
Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility .10,11
