Interested In
Accelerating Around an Unbanked Curve
The Physics T eacher  (February 2006)
Universal Gravity T urn T rajectories
Journal of Applied Physics  (May 2004)
Designing a program trajectory of a smooth turn
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2021) 04 October 2023 22:52:43
Optimal trajectories for symmetric turns
Stephen Kaczkowskia)
South Carolina Governor’s School for Science and Mathematics, Hartsville, South Carolina 29550
(Received 25 July 2022; accepted 7 March 2023)
The problem of determining minimal time trajectories in a plane constrained by an upper bound on
the magnitude of the acceleration vector is reexamined. In the previous work [Am. J. Phys. 49(7),
685–688 (1981)], a stationary solution of a functional, applied over curves in two-dimensional
velocity space, was used to ﬁnd explicit expressions for what was claimed to be a minimum turn
time trajectory. In this paper, this work is furthered by a formal demonstration that the turn time
associated with this trajectory is indeed lower than that corresponding to any other smooth
trajectory. Supporting evidence for this claim is provided by numerical procedures, which aredeveloped to allow comparisons between the turn times of competing trajectories across a range of
parameter values of the turn width, the initial speed, and the magnitude of the acceleration vector.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0114235
I. INTRODUCTION
Determining an optimal path that satisﬁes a set of con-
straints is a problem that has been studied for many years.
Such problems have widespread applications. For example,Dubins1investigated the shortest smooth path, constrained
by an upper bound on the average curvature, that connects
two points in the Euclidean plane with prescribed tangents.Such works have found applications in optimal control theo-
ries, planning algorithms, aeronautics, and robotics.2,3An
interesting analog of Dubin’s work, which was addressed byPalffy-Muhoray and Unruh,4involved the determination of a
curve of the minimum length in two-dimensional velocity
space constrained by an upper bound on the magnitude ofthe acceleration along with prescribed boundary conditions
on velocities and positions. An immediate application of this
work was a method for determining a minimal turn-time tra-jectory, which will be referred to here as an “optimal
trajectory.” They offered no formal proof of optimality.
4
This paper presents two separate lines of evidence to conﬁrm
that their result is an optimal trajectory when certain classes
of positional and velocity boundary conditions are imposed.
The following example illustrates the problem considered
in this paper. An automobile is traveling west along thesouthern border of a large uniformly paved empty lot, and
the driver wants to make a U-turn (180
/C14turn) as quickly as
possible without skidding with the requirement that, at theconclusion of the U-turn, the driver will be at a distance L
north of their current location and traveling east at the same
speed as the initial westbound speed. Which path and trajec-tory should be followed to minimize the turnaround time?
Here, the “path” refers to a curve in the plane, while
“trajectory” refers to the time parameterization of the planecurve given by the components of the associated vector val-
ued function xðtÞ;yðtÞ/C10/C11
.
LetOð0;0ÞandPð0;LÞbe the starting and ending points
of the turn. Here, the northernly direction aligns with thepositive y-axis, and the points Oand Pshare the same
abscissa (longitude). In terms of the components of the tra-
jectory, the point Oisxð0Þ;yð0Þ ðÞ ,a n di f Tdenotes the
time, it will take to complete the turn, then the point Pcan
be written as xðTÞ;yðTÞ ðÞ . Taken together this information
deﬁnes the following two pairs of positional boundary
conditions :x0ðÞ¼0;y0ðÞ¼0;xTðÞ¼0;yTðÞ¼L: (1)
The turn time
Twill depend on several factors, including the
initial and ﬁnal velocities v0and vf. For the main problem,
these velocities can be expressed in the plane vector form as
v0¼/C0 v0;0 hi ;vf¼v0;0hi ; (2)
where v0is the initial speed. The expressions in Eq. (2)are
symmetric with respect to the vertical axis in velocity space,
and these will be referred to as the velocity boundary condi-
tions . In this paper, the use of the phrase “symmetric turns”
primarily alludes to the symmetry of the velocity boundary
conditions, but the term also relates to the fact—which willbe seen later—that the optimal trajectory will be symmetricwith respect to the time T=2 and to the line y¼L=2.
It was shown in Ref. 4that to minimize the turn time, the
magnitude of the acceleration ajjmust be constant during the
turn.
4A proof of this fact is provided in the Appendix .
Trajectories with constant a¼ajjwill be referred to as
trajectories of constant magnitude acceleration or simply as
“a-trajectories,” where the latter is used in contexts where a
class of trajectories, each associated with a particular value
ofa, is considered. The minimal time trajectory will be an
a-trajectory; however, as will be seen, there are innumerable
a-trajectories that satisfy prescribed boundary conditions on
the position and velocity, which are not optimal.
The restriction on ajjcan be connected to a no-skid condi-
tion by considering the frictional force exerted by the pave-
ment on the car’s tires. Here, an appeal can be made to asimple model in which the upper bound for ajjis equated to
l
sg;where lsis the coefﬁcient of static friction and gis the
acceleration due to gravity. If ajjdoes not exceed lsg, trac-
tion will be maintained and no skidding will occur. If skid-
ding occurred, the frictional force would decrease because
the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction lkis less than ls. Also,
because skidding could occur at different locations and forvarying durations along a path, it is difﬁcult to calculate or
predict its effect on the total turn time. Thus, the no-skid
restriction simpliﬁes the analysis by limiting the ﬁeld of via-ble trajectories.
Before obtaining the minimal time trajectory and its corre-
sponding path, a preliminary problem will be addressed that
is similar to the main problem in its underlying assumptions
425 Am. J. Phys. 91(6), June 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 425 04 October 2023 22:52:43
and boundary conditions; however, it differs in that infor-
mation about the car’s speed proﬁle vðtÞbut not its direc-
tion—that is, not the complete velocity vector vðtÞ—will
be assumed beforehand. In this case, imagine that the vehi-cle is autonomous, and its systems are programed to calcu-
late and execute a particular type of speed proﬁle vðtÞ
throughout the course of the turn. Upon incorporating thisadditional constraint, the problem to be addressed is that of
ﬁnding the a-trajectory for a given type of vðtÞthat satisﬁes
the boundary conditions. With or without the constraintimposed on vðtÞ, these types of problems stand in contrast
to those that restrict the actual motion to pre-determined
paths (see, e.g., Ref. 5).
A brief outline of the paper is as follows: In Sec. 