Interested In
Electric field metrology for SI traceability: Systematic measurement uncertainties in electromagnetically
induced transparency in atomic vapor
J. Appl. Phys.  (June 2017)
Electromagnetically induced transparency in a Λ-type molecular system with permanent dipole moments
revisited
J. Chem. Phys.  (September 2012)
Weak electric-field detection with sub-1 Hz resolution at radio frequencies using a Rydberg atom-based
mixer
AIP Advances  (April 2019) 04 October 2023 22:50:10
Producing slow light in warm alkali vapor using electromagnetically
induced transparency
Kenneth DeRose, Kefeng Jiang, Jianqiao Li,Macbeth Julius, Linzhao Zhuo, Scott Wenner,a)
and Samir Balib)
Department of Physics, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056-1866
(Received 2 October 2022; accepted 27 November 2022)
We present undergraduate-friendly instructions on how to produce light pulses propagating through
warm Rubidium vapor with speeds less than 400 m/s, i.e., nearly a million times slower than c.W e
elucidate the role played by electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) in producing slow
light pulses and discuss how to achieve the required experimental conditions. The optical setup is
presented, and details provided for preparation of pump, probe, and reference pulses of the requiredsize, frequency, intensity, temporal width, and polarization purity. EIT-based slow light pulses
provide the most widely studied architecture for creating quantum memories. Therefore, the basic
concepts presented here are useful for physics and engineering majors who wish to get involved inthe development of cutting-edge quantum technologies.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0128967
I. INTRODUCTION
It has been two decades since the ﬁrst demonstration of
slow optical pulses propagating through atomic media.1,2
Slow light was revealed as the striking consequence of a
quantum mechanical phenomenon in light–matter interaction
known as EIT, i.e., electromagnetically induced transpar-ency. EIT arises from the interference between probabilityamplitudes for absorption pathways that are simultaneously
excited by two resonant light ﬁelds—one strong, referred to
as the pump (or coupling) ﬁeld, and the other weak, referredto as the probe.
3,4EIT and slow light in warm alkali vapor
continue to be central topics of research in quantum informa-
tion and quantum technology, particularly for building robustquantum memories,
5–7and stable photon-shot-noise-limited
electromagnetic ﬁeld sensors using Rydberg atoms.8In Ref.
6, for instance, the authors provide an overview of current
approaches to quantum memory and state that “although allof these approaches have been studied and demonstrated,EIT remains the most popular scheme for quantum memo-
ry,” because, “in comparison to the other approaches, the
EIT approach has a long storage time and is a relativelyeasy-to-implement and inexpensive solution.”
An excellent article on EIT-based experiments for under-
graduate laboratories was published just over a decade ago.
9
Elegant EIT-based experiments carried out at undergraduateinstitutions have also been reported.
10However, an
undergraduate-friendly experimental description of slowlight in atomic vapor does not exist. In this paper, we
endeavor to ﬁll this gap. This is important because an
increasing number of physics and engineering majors wishto get involved in the development of cutting-edge quantumtechnologies.
There are several pedagogical advantages to introducing
the concepts of EIT and slow light in an optics class for
undergraduate seniors and ﬁrst/second-year graduate stu-dents. For instance, in the advanced lecture/lab course“Optics and Laser Physics” that we teach at Miami
University, students often ask, “We’ve read about laser
applications in imaging, communications and medicine…can you tell us about quantum applications we haven’t heardof?” EIT and slow light can provide a satisfying answer to
this question. EIT physics is a natural extension to what
these students have already learned about light–matter inter-action. Early in the semester, they are introduced topopulation-rate equations for a laser system, which sets thestage for an EIT-based slow light system, since the simplestmodel for either system is provided by a three-level atom.Furthermore, students know about group versus phase veloc-ity, and therefore have all the necessary background to learnabout how a steep positive gradient of the refractive indexwithin a narrow EIT spectral window can lead to a dramati-cally slow group velocity.
In this article, we state the relevant theoretical results for
EIT and slow light, and describe our experimental setup forproducing slow light pulses with group velocities less than400 m/s. A price list for parts is included in the online sup-
plementary material.
11
