Interested In
Scattering problems via real-time wave packet scattering
Am. J. Phys.  (July 2021)
Almost-periodic wave packets and wave packets of invariant shape
American Journal of Physics  (June 2003)
Tunneling of a W ave Packet
Journal of Applied Physics  (June 2004) 04 October 2023 22:49:15
A wave packet approach to resonant scattering
A. M. Michalik and F . Marsiglioa)
Department of Physics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2E1, Canada
(Received 29 June 2022; accepted 4 November 2022)
Resonant transmission occurs when constructive interference results in the complete passage of an
incoming wave through an array of barriers. In this paper, we explore such a scenario with one-dimensional models. We adopt wave packets with ﬁnite width to illustrate the deterioration of
resonance with decreasing wave packet width and suggest an approximate wave function for the
transmitted and reﬂected components, derived from aspects of both the wave packet and plane
wave approaches. A comparison with exact numerical calculations shows excellent agreement and
provides insight into the scattering process.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers. https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0106701
I. INTRODUCTION
Scattering experiments are one of the most effective
ways of probing matter. Physicists have been throwingprojectiles at objects to learn something a bout the projec-
tile, the object, or the interaction between the two forcenturies.
Over the course of the last century, however, scattering
experiments have been associated more with learning aboutthe object. A classic example is the series of alpha scatteringexperiments by Geiger and Marsden
1with guidance from
Rutherford. In this experiment, alpha particles were used tolearn about the inner structure of the atom. Modern particleaccelerators use higher energy particle beams to probe theinternal structure of the nucleus. Experimenters utilize thesame principle with larger scale targets, be they molecules orsolids, by using x rays or neutron beams. In each case, theincoming energy can be varied, and the scattering proﬁle canbe measured as a function of the angle and outgoing energy.These are all three-dimensional problems, and our under-standing of them is well developed partly because we focuson the simpliﬁed scenario where the incoming and outgoingprojectiles are well-described by a plane wave. In this paper,we move beyond the plane wave approximation to considerincoming and outgoing wave packets. To keep things rela-tively simple, we follow the traditional procedure used in theplane wave approach by ﬁrst restricting ourselves to onedimension. The two- or three-dimensional case is consider-
ably more complicated and is beyond the scope of this
article.
Several recent descriptions of one-dimensional quantum
scattering have emphasized the wave packet approach.
2–7
All of this work has explored the conceptual advantages ofreal-time wave packet scattering over the stationary planewave approximation found in standard undergraduate quan-tum texts; in addition, two of these groups have adopted alattice approach. For example, Ref. 5emphasized the differ-
ences with the continuum approach and focused on narrowwave packets. In Ref. 6, one simulation focused on a dimer
(two-impurity) barrier where resonant transmission wasknown to take place and modeled the time-dependent scatter-ing interference. Our group
2,3,6has exploited a remarkable
feature: the lack of spreading for reasonably broad Gaussianwave packets on a lattice for certain wave vectors. Suchwave packets maintain their qualitative characteristics duringpropagation and, therefore, make the effects of the scatteringprocess clearer.In this work, we do two things. First, we generalize the pos-
sibilities for resonant transmission by considering any numberof barriers. Various aspects of this problem have alreadyappeared in the literature
10,11with some variation of what we
consider here, so we will merely provide a brief overview ofthe theory. More speciﬁcally, we consider scattering from aperiodic array of Nidentical impurities/barriers, each spaced
mlattice sites apart. This problem is likely to be more familiar
to the reader in the continuum limit and has been addressedthrough the transfer matrix formalism in Ref. 12.T h et i g h t -
binding limit of various models of this problem on a latticehas also been treated in Refs. 2,3,8,a n d 9. For completeness,
a derivation is presented in the supplementary material. Theresult of this derivation is that, given a barrier conﬁgurationconsisting of Nimpurity potentials, each with strength V,
spaced mlattice spacings apart, then, for a particular disper-
sion relation, there will exist a number of plane waves withﬁxed wave vector that will yield unit transmission and zeroreﬂectance.
However, there is a conceptual shortcoming with a time-
independent plane wave approach: it does not give a com-
plete qualitative understanding of the scattering process,especially during resonant transmission. From a plane wavedescription, we can calculate the transmission and reﬂectioncoefﬁcients, but the components themselves are always planewaves before and after the scattering process. At resonance,the reﬂected component is exactly zero. Using a Gaussian
wave packet that retains its shape under propagation and
nonresonant scattering, we can show that the reﬂected wavepacket proﬁle at resonance is non-zero, contrary to the wavepacket description. It is also no longer Gaussian. Thisreﬂected shape proﬁle is derivable from a plane wavedescription of sufﬁciently broad wave packets.
Therefore, our second goal is to study how the scattering
proﬁle changes when a Gaussian wave-packet with real-space width a<1is used. (As a!1 , we approach the
plane wave description.) In this case, even at resonance, thetransmission will be less than unity, and a reﬂected portionwill appear. We can study the dependence of the reﬂectedportion on the wave packet width. Numerically, we ﬁnd avery peculiar shape for the reﬂected packet, while the trans-mitted portion remains essentially Gaussian. In addition, wederive a closed approximate analytical formula, which worksremarkably well, both in describing the reﬂection and trans-mission, and in giving the detailed form of the scatteredwave packet proﬁle. We examine the validity and limitationsof this approximation by comparing it with exact numerical
102 Am. J. Phys. 91(2), February 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 102 04 October 2023 22:49:15
solutions. It will be clear that when barriers with extended
spatial structure are used, increasingly wide wave packets
are required to recover the plane wave results.
As mentioned earlier, when the scattering problem is
deﬁned on a lattice, wave packets with a speciﬁc centroidwave vector do not spread with time,
2,3,6unlike the contin-
uum case. The lattice model requires the use of the tight-
binding formalism (see the supplementary material fortechnical details) but allows for a much clearer description
of the scattering process. Senior undergraduate students
should be able to understand the content of this paper andfollow the required numerical work. These students should
also be able to reproduce most of the paper’s content as a
long-term project, assuming they have completed a prerequi-site numerical methods course.
