Interested In
Impact behavior of a superball
Am. J. Phys.  (March 2015)
Grip-slip behavior of a bouncing ball
American Journal of Physics  (November 2002)
Oblique angle collisions of two pendulum balls
Am. J. Phys.  (July 2022) 04 October 2023 22:53:39
Oblique collision of a soft rubber disk with a rigid surface
Rod Crossa)
School of Physics, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
(Received 21 November 2022; accepted 4 May 2023)
An oblique collision of an object with a rigid surface involves an initial sliding phase that persists
throughout the collision at glancing angles of incidence but which involves a subsequent grip phaseat higher angles of incidence. The grip phase itself terminates towards the end of the collision if the
contact region starts to slide backwards. Experimental evidence of the three separate stages of the
collision process is presented using a high speed video camera to ﬁlm the impact of a rubber disk
on a rigid horizontal surface. A simpliﬁed model of the process is presented, providing analytical
solutions that are at least qualitatively consistent with the experimental observations.
#2023
Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0135633
I. INTRODUCTION
An oblique angle collision between a sphere or a disk with
a rigid surface has been studied by many authors and is rea-
sonably well understood.1–8It is known that the colliding
object will slide along the surface throughout the collision if
it is incident at a glancing angle, but it will grip the surface
at higher angles of incidence. That is, the contact patch on
the object slides to a stop during the collision, and the fric-
tion force between the object and the surface changes from
sliding to static friction. If the contact patch comes to a stop
while the rest of the object continues to move forwards, then
the object will deform in a tangential direction as well as in adirection normal to the surface. The static friction force on
the contact patch can, subsequently, reverse direction, result-
ing in a decrease in the net horizontal impulse and a decrease
in the impulsive torque acting on the object.
Oblique angle collisions are of interest in many different
ﬁelds, including the impact of a sports ball with a striking
implement or playing surface, or impacts between small
granular particles or larger objects such as vehicles or astro-
nomical objects. In the present paper, the physics of the col-
lision process is examined for a speciﬁc case where the edgeof a soft rubber disk impacts a smooth, rigid surface.
Qualitative features of the collision are illustrated in Fig. 1
for a case where a circular object is incident from left to right
without spin on a horizontal surface. Figures 1(a) and1(b)
correspond to a glancing-angle collision where the friction
force F¼lN, where lis the coefﬁcient of sliding friction
andNis the normal reaction force. Both FandNincrease to
a maximum when the vertical compression of the object is a
maximum, then decrease to zero when the object leaves the
surface. The friction force acts to decrease the horizontal
speed of the object from v
x1tovx2, and the torque FRacts to
increase the rotation speed of the object to x2in a clockwise
sense, where Ris the radius of the object.
Figures 1(c)and1(d) correspond to a collision at a higher
angle of incidence where the bottom of the object slides to a
stop during the collision. During the sliding stage, F¼lN,
but the bottom of the object slides to a stop when vx¼Rx,
corresponding to a rolling condition. That is, the tangential
velocity at the bottom of the object, Rx, relative to the center
of mass, is equal and opposite to the horizontal velocity of
the center of mass. If the object actually started to roll then F
would suddenly decrease to zero and the object would
rebound with vx2¼Rx2since there would be no furtherchange in vxorx. However, the object grips the surface
when the bottom of the object comes to rest and then static
friction acts to extend the duration of the friction force, so
Rxincreases to a value greater than vxduring the collision.
While the bottom of the object remains at rest, the top of the
object vibrates forward and then backwards, resulting in a
reversal in the direction of F. Nevertheless, the object usu-
ally rebounds in an overspinning mode with Rx2>vx2. Near
the end of the collision, the object loses its grip since N
decreases towards zero. If the object slides throughout the
collision, as it does at glancing angles, then it rebounds with
Rx2<vx2.
Experimental results have been presented previously
which are consistent with the qualitative results shown in
Fig.1.2–5Experimental studies tend to focus on the rebound
speed and the angle and spin of the colliding object when theincident speed, angle, and spin are varied, yielding values for
land the coefﬁcients of restitution in the vertical and hori-
zontal directions. High speed video provides additional
information on vertical compression of a bouncing ball, but
very few studies have been reported on deformation of a ball
in the horizontal direction. The main problem is that it is not
possible to examine the interior of a bouncing ball using avideo camera. In the present paper, experimental and theoret-
ical results are presented for the oblique bounce of a 74 g,
70 mm diameter, 20 mm thick Chutex rubber disk, with a
focus on deformation of the disk in the horizontal direction.
A soft rubber disk (Duro 40) was chosen so that horizontal
deformation could be more easily observed.
A typical result is shown in Fig. 2where the disk was inci-
dent at 6.3 m/s on a smooth ceramic tile, without spin and atan angle of 31
/C14to the horizontal. The disk commenced slid-
ing, then gripped the surface, and then the contact region slid
backwards as the disk lifted off the surface. Radial lines and
white dots drawn on the disk show that the upper region of
the disk continues to rotate even while points at the bottom
of the disk remain at rest, and the incident and rebound
velocity of points at the bottom of the disk are opposite insign, in both the vertical and horizontal directions.
