Interested In
Calibration apparatus for precise barometers and vacuum gauges
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A  (July 2004)
A Logarithmic Barometer
Rev Sci Instrum  (December 2004)
Two-Fluid Barometer as a Student Project
American Journal of Physics  (November 1955) 04 October 2023 23:03:33
A new microscopic look into pressure fields and local buoyancy
S.Meneses Jo ~ao,a)J. P . Santos Pires, and J. M. Viana Parente Lopesb)
Centro de F /C19ısica das Universidades do Minho e Porto and Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto,
Rua do Campo Alegre 687, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal
(Received 18 June 2021; accepted 12 January 2022)
Deﬁning local pressures is pivotal to understanding phenomena such as buoyancy and atmospheric
physics, which always require space-varying pressure ﬁelds to be considered. Such ﬁelds have
precise deﬁnitions within the frameworks of hydro-thermodynamics and the kinetic theory ofgases, but a pedagogical approach based on standard statistical mechanics techniques is still
lacking. In this paper, we propose a new microscopic deﬁnition of local pressure inside a classical
ﬂuid, relying upon a local barometer potential that is built into the many-particle Hamiltonian. Thissetup allows pressure to be locally deﬁned as an ensemble average of the radial force exerted by
the barometer potential on the gas’ particles. Moreover, this same framework is also employed in a
microscopic derivation of buoyancy of immersed bodies in the presence of arbitrary external ﬁelds.As instructive examples, buoyant forces are calculated for ideal ﬂuids in the presence of a uniform
force ﬁeld, in the presence of a spherical harmonic conﬁnement ﬁeld and in rotation with a
constant angular velocity.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics
Teachers. https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0060479
I. INTRODUCTION
Thermodynamics is an essential tool for understanding the
world around us, giving a self-contained yet simple descrip-tion of physical processes involving many particles, butusing a minimal number of variables. For example, tempera-
ture and pressure are pivotal concepts in the thermodynamics
of ﬂuids but are also intrinsically macroscopic, emergingonly if the number of particles is very large and maintained
in some state of equilibrium.
A connection between the basic laws that govern the
mechanics of microscopic degrees of freedom and their ther-modynamic manifestation is provided by the ediﬁce of statis-
tical physics.
1–3Simply put, the temperature of a ﬂuid
measures the mean kinetic energy per particle, while its pres-sure is the magnitude of momentum transferred (on average,per unit area, and per unit time) from the jiggling particles to
the walls of its container through random elastic collisions.
This picture provides the essential microscopic foundationsof thermodynamics, but previous investigations on physics
education
4–10have shown these concepts as difﬁcult to grasp
by most physics and engineering students, especially whenasked to provide insight on practical situations falling out-
side the scope of typical textbook examples.5,6Despite
focusing on the early undergraduate years, these studies indi-cate that deep misconceptions may arise when these concepts
are ﬁrst introduced and persist thereafter. Nevertheless, this
issue may be mitigated by providing instructors with newways of explaining these ideas and, in particular, giving awider variety of transparent examples that more clearly con-
nect to real-life situations, while retaining a simple enough
description that makes their physical interpretation as trans-parent as possible. Here, we provide such an instructive
example that describes pressure ﬁelds and buoyancy within a
canonical formulation for the equilibrium statistical mechan-ics of classical gases.
The usual textbook treatments deﬁne pressure as a global
property of any ﬂuid in equilibrium, when conﬁned to a ﬁnite
volume. In contrast, many physical phenomena depend onlocal deﬁnitions of pressure, now described by position-dependent scalar ﬁelds that permeate the whole system.
Atmospheric physics
11and hydrodynamics12are two para-
digmatic examples in which non-uniform pressure ﬁelds are
ubiquitous. A simpler example is provided by the phenome-
non of buoyancy, which relies upon unbalanced pressuresacting on different surfaces of an immersed solid body.Most commonly, this pressure gradient is induced byEarth’s gravitational ﬁeld and gives rise to familiar
Archimedes’s principle: The weight of an immersed body is
reduced by an amount that equals the weight of the dis-placed ﬂuid. However, buoyancy is a much more generalphenomenon, as space-varying pressures can be caused byany external ﬁeld acting on the ﬂuid particles. A myriad of
formal microscopic derivations,
13–18some including parti-
cle–particle interactions, as well as generalizations19–22of
Archimedes’s principle to nonstandard external ﬁelds (e.g.,centrifugal buoyancy) can be found in the literature.However, we have not found a pedagogical discussion that
illustrates how space-varying pressure ﬁelds and buoyancy
can emerge from a microscopic theory based on the stan-dard equilibrium statistical mechanics that is typicallytaught at the undergraduate level. This approach can serveas an interesting basis for practical short-term projects in
statistical physics courses that help students to build a better
intuition for the applications of the theory they are learning.
In this paper, we provide a new pedagogical application of
statistical mechanics by microscopically describing non-uniform pressure using the canonical formalism for Ninde-
pendent classical particles in a state of global thermody-namic equilibrium at temperature T. The local pressure in
the gas, PðrÞ, is probed via a localized spherical “soft-wall”
potential that gets included in the system’s Hamiltonian.This probe acts as a small barometer, whose volume coupleslinearly to the pressure in its location and, hence, deﬁnes thepressure ﬁeld at any point within the gas. With this setup, we
obtain a microscopic expression for the space-varying pres-
sure induced in the gas by an arbitrary external potential,UðrÞ. In the limit of a sufﬁciently small and hard-walled
probe, we conclude that
179 Am. J. Phys. 90(3), March 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 179 04 October 2023 23:03:33
PðrÞ¼NkBTexp /C0UðrÞ
kBT/C18/C19
ð
dð3Þr0exp /C0Uðr0Þ
kBT/C18/C19 ; (1)
which is a local version of the ideal gas law. Similarly, by
measuring the net force exerted by the thermalized gas on
the local probe, we analyze the problem of buoyancy in this
system and arrive at the fundamental relation:
BðrÞ¼/C0$PðrÞ; (2)
where BðrÞis the buoyant force per unit volume acting on a
small solid immersed in the gas at the point r. The previous
expressions are employed to derive Archimedes’s principle in
three common examples: (i) a ﬂuid under a uniform gravita-
tional ﬁeld, (ii) a gas cloud conﬁned by a spherical harmonic
potential, and (iii) a ﬂuid rotating alongside its cylindrical con-
tainer. Examples (i) and (ii) may also help clear one common
misconception about the deﬁnition of pressure: the idea that
pressure requires hand-wall conﬁnement.10Finally, we note
that both Eqs. (1)and(2)are known results from the kinetic
theory of gases, which we critically review and discuss.
