Interested In
Bubble inductors: Pneumatic tuning of a stretchable inductor
AIP Advances  (December 2017)
Distance sensor using a cloth inductor
Journal of Applied Physics  (November 1988)
On the frequency characteristic of inductor in the filter of Hall thrusters
Journal of V acuum Science & T echnology A  (August 2010) 04 October 2023 22:58:26
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
An undergraduate physics experiment to measure
the frequency-dependent impedance of inductors using
an Anderson bridge
Andrew James Murraya)
Photon Science Institute, Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Manchester,
Manchester M13 9PL, United Kingdom
Carl Hickmanb)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL,
United Kingdom
(Received 28 February 2023; accepted 27 June 2023)
One of the most accurate ways to measure the impedance of an electrical component is to place it
in a bridge that is then balanced. The most familiar bridge in an undergraduate laboratory is the
Wheatstone bridge, which can measure resistance to high precision. Other types are, however,
required for reactive components. This paper describes the use of Anderson’s bridge to measureinductance, allowing both the inductance and resistance of different inductors to be determined.
The inductors are analysed with different cores: perspex, copper, and steel. Models for the
inductance that include the effect of skin depth, winding proximity, eddy currents, and core effectsare introduced and compared to measurements in the frequency range from 100 Hz to 100 kHz.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0148114
I. INTRODUCTION
Accurate determination of electrical component values is
essential to many experiments in research and industry, since
these values are then used to ascertain a physical quantity from
a measurement. Teaching these measurement skills is an impor-
tant part of a physics laboratory course. However, the cost of
running undergraduate lab programs at University level can bevery high, and inevitably there are constraints on the budgets
that are available. In our laboratories, we address this problem
by designing and building many of the experiments that are
required. This has the advantage of lower cost and ease of in-
house repairs, ensuring a rapid response to any failures that can
occur. By tailoring and adapting the experiments to the overall
teaching program, we, therefore, optimize the link between the-
ory and experiment that is taught in each year.
The experiments described here were developed for our
second-year laboratory, and we currently have ﬁve sets of these
in operation. The design allows students to explore a range of
ideas on how to take null measurements, how to determine
complex impedances, and how to systematically relate these to
different physical processes. The experiments, hence, provide
an instructive tool for exploration of the physics of electromag-
netic induction and how this can be measured in a realcomponent. As an example, the Anderson bridge allows non-
linear terms (as arise when using magnetic cores) to becomeclearly visible once the bridge is balanced. These non-lineareffects cannot be measured using standard commercial induc-tance meters, which demonstrate the advantage of a well-balanced bridge for this type of measurement.
The Anderson bridge is described in Sec. 