I units 

Mitchell Golden  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 688–691 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0085513
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Low-frequency ultrasound for the delivery of therapeutics to the gastrointestinal tract
J Acoust Soc Am  (April 2016)
Dielectric constant of supercritical water in a large pressure–temperature range
J. Chem. Phys.  (September 2020)
Institutional features of digitalization of the decision-making system of a transport company
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 2023) 04 October 2023 23:16:22
A new presentation of electromagnetic relations in SI units
Mitchell Goldena)
Private consultant, New York, New York 10025
(Received 17 January 2022; accepted 29 June 2022)
In recent years, more courses in electromagnetism are using the “Syste `me International” (SI) units
as opposed to Gaussian-cgs. The confusing notation used to formulate SI with origins in the early19th century still persists in instruction. This work shows that electromagnetism may be taught
relatively painlessly in the units that virtually everyone uses by employing a new presentation that
makes the equations nearly as simple as those in the Heaviside–Lorentz system commonly used by
theoretical physicists. Introducing a new coupling constant jand some new notation for the ﬁelds,
it is possible to dispense with /C15
0andl0and the conceptual framework from which they come. As a
result, it is possible achieve much greater clarity, while using all the same symbols and relations as
in the extant literature. #2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0085513
I. INTRODUCTION
For decades, instructors have struggled over the choice of
picking units and notation when presenting classical electro-magnetism. The Syste `me International (SI) conventions are
by far the most commonly used for actual measurements, butthey come encumbered with confusing notation, reﬂecting anobsolete conceptual framework. Two other possibilities, theGaussian-cgs (Gcgs) and Heaviside–Lorentz (HL) systems,are used in some places but have other signiﬁcant drawbacks,especially from a practical point of view.
While it is interesting to come up with ways of parame-
terizing multiple possible systems of units, with variablesthat allow switching between them,
1this is not the goal of
this work. It is instead to formulate a notation for thecommonly used SI units so they are easier to teach stu-
dents and are not discordant with modern approaches to
ﬁeld theory.
This article will show that SI units themselves are not
confusing; if one presents them properly, all the equationsare essentially as simple in SI as they are in any other unitsystem. The problem is instead with the use of the quanti-ties/C15
0andl0. The deﬁnitions of these constants originate
within the 19th century framework in which the electricand magnetic ﬁelds had their seat in the stresses andmotions of the luminiferous aether. It is for reasons buriedin more than a century and a half of history that the nota-tion imposes an unwieldly and non-Lorentz invariant“symmetry” ðE;/C15Þ$ð B;lÞ. This choice turns the Lorentz-
invariant notation, such as the construction of the relativis-tic notation for the ﬁeld tensor F
l/C23, into a hodgepodge of /C150
andl0. Because of these issues, many instructors ﬁnd the
notation distasteful and students ﬁnd it bewildering. Thechoice of name for /C15
0, “permittivity of the vacuum,”—
which implies that the vacuum should be regarded as pos-
sessing some sort of dielectric property—is drastically out
of line with the modern viewpoint.
This article will start from ﬁrst principles and outline a
new presentation of the electromagnetic relations, one thatallows for the use of SI units without introducing /C15
0andl0.
Maxwell’s equations will take a simple and memorableform, and the connection to relativistically invariant notationwill be straightforward without extraneous factors of 4 por
coupling constants in unexpected places.