IL 01 2022
The analog computer: Beyond the museum artwork, a tool
for studying linear and nonlinear systems 
Marcello Carlà
Am. J. Phys.  90, 263–272 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009634
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Mid-infrared reflectography for the analysis of pictorial surface layers in artworks
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2013)
Artificial intelligence art: Attitudes and perceptions toward human versus artificial intelligence artworks
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2023)
The style and creativity of southeast Asian calligraphy wood carving
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2023) 04 October 2023 23:06:23
The analog computer: Beyond the museum artwork, a tool for studying
linear and nonlinear systems
Marcello Carl /C18aa)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Florence, Via G. Sansone 1 50019, Sesto Fiorentino,
Florence, Italy
(Received 14 January 2021; accepted 20 August 2021)
Analog computers have been a valuable resource for a time to solve linear as well as nonlinear
differential equations before being superseded by digital computers. However, interest toward
analog computing has not fully faded away. Though not competitive for accuracy or speed, analogcomputers have the important property of being true physical systems that can be made to behave
according to a given equations set. This aspect makes analog computers interesting educational
tools for hands-on work with real physical systems, where a number of effects, both linear and notlinear, can easily be added at will (a feature not readily available in mechanical systems). This
paper describes the implementation of a modular, very ﬂexible, cheap, yet powerful analog
computer, suitable for student laboratories. As examples of possible applications, a selection oflinear and nonlinear oscillator models are described that can be used in the laboratory to introduce
students to various nonlinear effects.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of
Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009634
I. INTRODUCTION
We can study the behavior of an electrical or electronic
network by writing down and resolving a system of equa-tions (may be nonlinear but almost always differential) thatstart from the physical principles governing each element of
the network. This is the subject of several ﬁrst or second
year classes and laboratories for physics or engineeringstudents.
The converse also is true: if we have a system of equations
and we are able to assemble an electronic network described bythose equations, then the network, left alone after setting the ini-tial conditions, will behave according to the solution of the sys-tem. We can observe and capture that behavior (i.e., we can seethe equations’ solution, for example, on an oscilloscope). This isthe central point of analog electronic computing.
A detailed history of analog computing is beyond the pur-
pose of this paper. Only a few notes are useful here to outlinea historical reference frame. For the reader interested in con-temporary accounts, historical material is widely availableon the internet.
1,2
After World War 