Interested In
A Pictorial Approach to Lenz’ s Law
Phys. T each.  (April 2018)
Lenz’ s law in the kitchen
The Physics T eacher  (May 1999)
A multidimensional framework of conceptual change for developing chemical equilibrium learning
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2018) 04 October 2023 22:49:27
Science on a stick: An experimental and demonstration platform
for learning several physical principles
Dhananjay V. Gadrea)and Harsh Sharmaa)
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Netaji Subhas University of Technology,
New Delhi 110078, India
Sangeeta D. Gadreb)
Department of Physics, Kirori Mal College, University of Delhi, New Delhi 110078, India
Smriti Srivastavac)
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, Netaji Subhas University
of Technology, New Delhi 110078, India
(Received 4 December 2021; accepted 10 December 2022)
We share the design for a simple apparatus that, when paired with an Arduino processor and a
computer, can be used in a wide range of laboratory measurements: observing linear kinematics,
conﬁrming Faraday’s and Lenz’s laws, measuring magnetic moments, and observing the effects of
eddy currents. The setup is simple, inexpensive, easy to replicate, and can even be fabricated andused by students working at home.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of
Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0080881
I. INTRODUCTION
Internet e-commerce companies, such as Amazon,
Sparkfun, and Sunrom, have enabled easy access to embed-
ded computers, electronic components, sensors, and fabrica-
tion tools. This, in turn, has enabled the teaching communityto create science demonstration and pedagogy activities forthe classroom that could help kindle and retain student inter-
est in STEM subjects.
We propose a DIY experimental apparatus that focuses on
the linear motion of a magnet falling through a coil posi-tioned on a vertical acrylic tube. It consists of easily avail-
able electronic and other components, common household
items such as a plastic clothespin, and an Arduino platformconnected to a desktop/laptop computer running a custom
PYTHON code. This method enables veriﬁcation of kinematics
equations, estimation of acceleration due to gravity alongwith veriﬁcation of Faraday’s law and Lenz’s law, and esti-
mation of the magnet’s dipole moment using this single
experimental setup.
