Interested In
Resource Letter MP-3: The Manhattan Project and Related Nuclear Research
American Journal of Physics  (October 2016)
Resource Letter MP-2: The Manhattan project and related nuclear research
American Journal of Physics  (February 201 1)
Resource Letter MP-1: The Manhattan Project and related nuclear research
American Journal of Physics  (September 2005) 04 October 2023 22:53:22
RESOURCE LETTER
Resource Letters are guides for college and university physicists, astronomers, and other scientists to literature, websites, and other teaching a ids.
Each Resource Letter focuses on a particular topic and is intended to help teachers improve course content in a speciﬁc ﬁeld of physics or tointroduce nonspecialists to this ﬁeld. The Resource Letters Editorial Board meets annually to choose topics for which Resource Letters will be
commissioned during the ensuing year. Items in the Resource Letter below are labeled with the letter E to indicate elementary level or material of
general interest to persons seeking to become informed in the ﬁeld, the letter I to indicate intermediate level or somewhat specialized material, or t he
letter A to indicate advanced or specialized material. No Resource Letter is meant to be exhaustive and complete; in time there may be more than one
Resource Letter on a given subject. A complete list by ﬁeld of all Resource Letters published to date is at the website <http://ajp.dickinson.edu/
Readers/resLetters.html >. Suggestions for future Resource Letters, including those of high pedagogical value, are welcome and should be sent to
Professor Mario Belloni, Editor, AJP Resource Letters, Davidson College, Department of Physics, Box 6910, Davidson, NC 28035; e-mail:mabelloni@davidson.edu.
Resource Letter MP-4: The Manhattan Project and related nuclear
research
B. Cameron Reeda)
Department of Physics (Emeritus), Alma College, Alma, Michigan 48801
(Received 9 March 2023; accepted 19 April 2023)
This fourth Resource Letter on the Manhattan Project comprises over 140 new sources to complement
the 390 listed in the ﬁrst three on this topic. Books, review papers, and journal articles are cited for the
categories of general works; speciﬁc topics within the Manhattan Project; technical and historicalworks; biographies and autobiographies; international wartime programs, allied intelligence, and the
use of the bombs; postwar developments; and educational materials. A separate section lists videos
and websites.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0149901
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the publication of the ﬁrst Resource Letter on this
topic in 2005, awareness of nuclear issues has waxed andwaned. Perhaps the biggest change since then has been the
increasing awareness of climate change and the role nuclear
power will have to play as we transition away from fossilfuels. Tempering this are, as always, concerns with possibleaccidents, dual-use technologies, the politics of waste dis-posal, and developments surrounding nuclear weapons.North Korea continues to enhance both its weapons anddelivery systems (Ref. 120); enrichment activities continue
in Iran; “established” nuclear powers are undertaking expen-sive, long-term expansions and upgrades of their arsenals(Ref. 123); arms control agreements are being allowed to
expire; and sabre-rattling associated with Russia’s brutalinvasion of Ukraine has the world potentially closer to anuclear exchange than at any time since the height of theCold War in the 1980s; the world faces many nuclear issuesand choices (Ref. 36). Progress on nuclear arms limitations
and approaches to disarmament seems to be movingbackwards.
In combination with Resource Letters MP-1,
1M-2,2and
MP-3,3the sources listed here bring the total to over 500.
Those listed here include some that should have beenincluded in these earlier Resource Letters, but many arerecent; interest in the science, personalities, and legacy ofthe Manhattan Project continue apace. As with the previousinstallments in this series, I have had to draw the line some-where as to what topics, particularly of the “postwar” type,to exclude or touch upon only minimally for sake of com-pleteness. For example, the Chernobyl and Fukushima disas-ters are not strictly Manhattan issues, and histories ofpostwar weapons systems and tests could be the subject of
their own extensive bibliographies, although I do include
some sources along these lines likely to be of wide interest.
Also, I largely eschew sources whose focus is more towards
historical/sociological interpretations of nuclear issues,
although this too is a gray area.
The organization of this Resource Letter follows that of
Refs. 1–3; within each section, books are listed ﬁrst, fol-
lowed by journal and magazine articles; where appropriate,
sources are cross-referenced to the earlier installments in this
series. Section 