Interested In
Scattering from a locally periodic potential
American Journal of Physics  (October 1992)
Role of higher ‐ multipolarity deformations in the properties of ‘octupolly’ deformed nuclei
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 1987)
Cluster Sums for the Ising Model
J. Math. Phys.  (December 2004) 04 October 2023 23:01:27
Band formation and defects in a finite periodic quantum potential
Todd K. Timberlakea)and Neilson Woodfield
Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Geology, Berry College, Mount Berry, Georgia 30149-5004
(Received 12 August 2020; accepted 3 September 2021)
Periodic quantum systems often exhibit energy spectra with well-deﬁned energy bands separated
by band gaps. The formation of band structure in such periodic systems is usually presented in thecontext of Bloch’s theorem or through other specialized techniques. Here, we present a simple
model of a ﬁnite one-dimensional periodic quantum system that can be used to explore the
formation of band structure in a straightforward way. Our model consists of an inﬁnite square well
containing several evenly spaced identical Dirac delta wells, both attractive and repulsive. We
solve for the energy eigenvalues of this system directly and show the formation of band structureas the number of delta wells increases as well as how the size of the bands and gaps depends on the
strength of the delta wells. These results are compared to the predictions from Bloch’s theorem. In
addition, we use this model to investigate how the energy spectrum is altered by the introduction oftwo types of defects in the periodicity of the system.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006391
I. INTRODUCTION
In a crystalline solid, individual atoms combine to form
regular arrangements. We can imagine constructing a one-dimensional crystal by starting with a single atom and thensuccessively adding more and more identical atoms equally
spaced along a line. While isolated, each of these atoms has
the same set of bound state energy eigenvalues. However,as the second atom is brought closer to the ﬁrst, each level ofthe isolated atom will split into two distinct levels in thecombined system of two closely spaced atoms, with the
amount of splitting depending on the interatomic separation.
For a system of Nclosely spaced atoms, each isolated level
splits into Ndistinct levels, and as Nbecomes very large, the
split levels form a practically continuous band of energyeigenvalues.
1Each band is typically separated from adjacent
bands by a noticeable gap. This process is sometimes called
the level splitting route to band formation. Level splittingand band structure can also occur in acoustical systems andsystems of coupled classical oscillators.
2–4
Energy bands and band gaps play important roles in deter-
mining the properties of a solid, such as its electrical conduc-
tivity. In insulators, the highest-energy levels occupied by
electrons in the ground state of the solid completely ﬁll oneband (the valence band), which is separated by a large gapfrom the band containing the lowest-energy levels that areunoccupied in the ground state (the conduction band).
Thermal energies are not sufﬁcient to excite electrons from
the valence band into the conduction band, so these materialsdo not conduct electricity. Semiconductors have a small gapbetween the valence and conduction bands, so the electronscan be thermally (or otherwise) excited into the conduction
band. In metals, there is no gap between the highest occupied
levels and the lowest unoccupied levels (for example, if aband is only partially ﬁlled when the solid is in its groundstate), so the electrons can easily be excited to higher levelsand these materials conduct electricity quite well.
A detailed understanding of the formation of band struc-
ture can be gained by investigating quantum mechanical sys-
tems with spatially periodic potential energy functions.
Students are typically introduced to these models in the con-text of Bloch’s theorem.
5,6Bloch’s theorem provides amethod for determining the band structure of a perfectly
periodic quantum system using only knowledge about the
potential energy in a single unit cell. A classic example ofthe application of Bloch’s theorem is the derivation of bandstructure in the Kronig–Penney model, which consists ofperiodic rectangular barriers.
7However, Bloch’s theorem is
somewhat abstract and may be difﬁcult for novice quantum
mechanics students to understand, and other methods for
deriving the band structure of a perfectly periodic quantumsystem may be similarly challenging.
8,9
Another aspect of Bloch’s theorem that may be confusing
for novice students is that it applies exactly only to inﬁniteperiodic systems. A ﬁnite system has boundaries, or surfaces,that necessarily disrupt the periodicity. Several methods
have been presented for computing energy eigenvalues in
ﬁnite periodic systems to illustrate level splitting and the for-mation of band structure, but these involve analytical techni-ques or numerical methods that may be unfamiliar tostudents.
10–12Other studies examine transmission resonances
in the scattering of particles passing through ﬁnite periodic
potentials.13–19These scattering studies show the energy
ranges for the incident particle that give rise to near-perfecttransmission, while other energy ranges produce almost notransmission; these transmission bands are closely related tothe energy bands for the periodic potential.
20Some of these
scattering studies use fairly elementary methods, but they do
not directly show the formation of band structure in theenergy spectrum.
Another problem with the methods mentioned above is
that they do not allow for the investigation of defects in theperiodic system. A defect is simply a disruption of the peri-
odicity in the (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) potential energy function of
the system. Although the boundaries of a ﬁnite periodic sys-tem represent one type of defect, many other types of defectsexist in real solids. For example, an atom in the solid may bedisplaced from its usual location (Frenkel defect) or it maybe missing altogether (vacancy defect). Another important
example is a substitutional defect or impurity defect, when
an atom in the perfect solid is replaced with a different one.Defects can play an important role in determining the proper-ties of a solid. In fact, the doping of semiconductors to alter
93 Am. J. Phys. 90(2), February 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 93 04 October 2023 23:01:27
their properties involves the intentional introduction of
impurities into the semiconductor crystal. Some prior studies
have investigated impurity-type defects in simple one-
dimensional systems, but these studies make use of numeri-cal methods that are likely unfamiliar to students.
21,22
In this paper, we present a very simple model for investi-
gating the level-splitting route to band formation in a ﬁnite
periodic quantum potential built from two potentials widelyused for quantum mechanics pedagogy: the inﬁnite square
well and Dirac delta wells.
23In Sec. 