IL 01 2023
Projectile motion with quadratic drag 
John L. Bradshaw  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 258–263 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0095643 04 October 2023 22:51:05
Projectile motion with quadratic drag
John L. Bradshawa),b)
Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry, Physics, and Engineering, Indiana University of Pennsylvania,
Indiana, Pennsylvania 15701
(Received 12 April 2022; accepted 30 December 2022)
Two-dimensional coupled nonlinear equations of projectile motion with air resistance in the form
of quadratic drag are often treated as inseparable and solvable only numerically. However, when
they are recast in terms of the angle between the projectile velocity and the horizontal, theybecome completely uncoupled and possess analytic solutions for projectile velocities as a function
of that angle. The equations relating the time and position coordinates to this angle are not
integrable in terms of elementary functions but are easy to integrate numerically. Additionally,energy equations explicitly including dissipation terms can be developed as integrals of the
equations of motion. One-dimensional numerical integrations can be treated in a pedagogically
straightforward way using numerical analysis software or even within a spreadsheet, making thistopic accessible to undergraduates. We present this approach with sample numerical results for
velocity components, trajectories, and energy-balance of a baseball-sized projectile.
#2023 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0095643
I. INTRODUCTION
Projectile motion is central to introduce the concepts of
motion and the foundations of classical mechanics in highschool and ﬁrst-year college physics courses. At this level,the effects of air resistance are usually neglected to be left
for an upper-level mechanics course where linear (Stokes)
and quadratic (Newtonian) drag models are introduced.Although linear drag is completely analytic, it is valid only
at low Reynolds numbers (low speed, small size, or high vis-
cosity). Quadratic drag dominates for many practical appli-cations in air, but only one-dimensional cases, vertical-only
or horizontal-only, are treated in most textbooks and many
classrooms. Two-dimensional quadratic drag is described bya set of coupled nonlinear differential equations that are solv-
able only numerically, see Parker’s treatment.
1Here, we
show that the numerical approach can be combined with aninsightful analytical treatment, resulting in a more compre-
hensive presentation.
Prior treatments of quadratic drag by Parker,1Ray and
Fr€ohlich,2Hayen,3and Mungan4are most relevant to this
presentation. Parker reduced the coupled nonlinear equations
of two-dimensional quadratic drag to a single, time-implicit,
numerically integrable scalar equation from which velocitycomponents and horizontal and vertical displacements werenumerically determined.
1More recently, Ray and Fr €ohlich,
using a similar approach, succeeded in inverting their scalar
equation to obtain a time-explicit solution to the equations ofmotion.2Both approaches are beyond an undergraduate
level.
Hayen took an alternate and less-well-known approach.3
Earlier work (Refs. 2–5 in Hayen’s paper) showed that an
analytic, time-implicit solution for the velocity components
is obtained when the equations of motion are recast in terms
of the angle /¼tan/C01vy=vx/C0/C1; however, this work is also
beyond the undergraduate level. In this paper, we introduce
the/-angle approach at an advanced undergraduate level,
elaborate on the role of energy dissipation by derivingenergy equations as integrals of the equations of motion, and
use this approach to quantitatively describe how quadratic
drag inﬂuences the short-, intermediate-, and long-timeproperties of a projectile trajectory. Mungan treats energy
dissipation, albeit in the vertical direction only;4Hayen also
brieﬂy treats energy dissipation.3
The integrals for time and distance as a function of /must
be done numerically. Our approach, like that of Timberlake
and Hasbun,5is to provide exposure to the underlying algo-
rithms before using commercial numerical analysis software.Spreadsheet applications are well-suited to this purpose. In
the supplementary material, we provide an Excel
VRﬁle for
numerical integration using the fourth order Runge–Kutta
(RK4) method; embedded pdf documents within the Excel
ﬁle introduce the RK4 method for spreadsheets and describe
ﬁve example RK4 integrations.6
In this analysis, we neglect buoyancy effects.7This is jus-
tiﬁed when the projectile density is large compared to the airdensity. Additionally, we neglect the added mass effect8
from projectile acceleration and lift from projectile spin.Erlichson and Davies consider spin and lift in golf-ball tra-
jectories; see Nathan’s website and Clanet’s paper for spin
effects in baseball trajectories.9–12
This paper is organized as follows: The vector relations
that deﬁne the equations of motion are developed in Sec. 