Interested In
Quartic and quintic polynomial interpolation
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2013)
Solving Boussinesq equation using quintic B-spline and quintic trigonometric B-spline interpolation
methods
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2017)
P T -symmetric couplers with competing cubic-quintic nonlinearities
Chaos  (November 2016) 04 October 2023 22:54:31
An alternative way to solve the small oscillations problem
Sergio A. Hojmana)
Departamento de Ciencias, Facultad de Artes Liberales, Universidad Adolfo Ib /C19a~nez, Santiago 7491169, Chile
and Departamento de F /C19ısica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Santiago 7800003, Chile
(Received 28 June 2022; accepted 22 February 2023)
An alternative approach to the n-dimensional small oscillations problem is presented. This method
is based on the ﬁnding of nnew independent constants of motion to get the neigenfrequencies and
thennormal coordinates of the problem. These constants of motion exist and may be explicitly
constructed for any small oscillations problem. Three examples are presented. One of them
involves solving a ﬁve-dimensional small oscillations problem whose solution is usually obtained
by ﬁnding the roots of a quintic algebraic equation. The approach constructed here is especiallysuited to deal with high-dimensional problems. Applications to small oscillations as well as to
high-degree algebraic equation solutions are discussed.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0106530
I. INTRODUCTION
The usual way to solve the small oscillations problem is
discussed in many undergraduate and graduate classicalmechanics textbooks such as Refs. 1–3that present at length
the customary approach as well as solved problems.
Symmetries and conservation laws play a fundamental
role in physics. Noether’s theorem establishes a relationbetween the symmetries of a physical system and its dynami-cally conserved physical quantities. Examples of the impor-
tance of conservation laws in physics are the conservation of
energy for Lagrangians invariant under time translations,momentum conservation for Lagrangians invariant under
space translations, and angular momentum conservation for
Lagrangians invariant under rotation (such as all of the cen-tral force problems). In a similar fashion, the examples pre-
sented in this work are solved by using new conservation
laws obtained directly from the equations of motion.
In general, a small oscillations problem is stated in terms
of two known n/C2nsymmetrical regular numerical matrices:
the kinetic energy matrix, Tand the potential energy matrix,
V. The problem consists in solving the coupled system,
T€qðtÞþVqðtÞ¼0( 1 )
for an n-dimensional vector qðtÞ. The usual solution is
obtained by using the ansatz for a speciﬁc normal mode
qðtÞ¼Qe
ixt(2)
and then solving the algebraic eigenproblem
/C0x2TþV ðÞ Q¼0( 3 )
for the neigenfrequencies xand the nnormal coordinates Q.
