Interested In
Measuring the Hannay geometric phase
Am. J. Phys.  (June 2022)
Hannay’ s hoop beyond asymptotics
Chaos  (August 2018)
Hannay angle study of the Foucault pendulum in action ‐ angle variables
American Journal of Physics  (February 1993) 04 October 2023 22:52:04
Heavy symmetric tops and the Hannay angle
Changsoo Parka)
Department of Physics, Dankook University, Cheonan 31116, South Korea
(Received 30 May 2022; accepted 9 January 2023)
The dynamics of a heavy symmetric top are studied in connection with the Hannay angle. When
the top undergoes a steady precession due to gravity without nutation, the Hannay angle has ageometric nature such that it is identical to the solid angle subtended by the loop swept out by the
symmetry axis of the top. Here, we show that the Hannay angle can also be described by the angle
between two radial vectors on the disk of the top corresponding to the pure spinning motion and
the coupled motion of spin and precession for one period of the precession. The geometric nature
of the angle between the two radial vectors is veriﬁed by demonstrating, via parallel transport, thatthe magnitude of the angle is the same as that of the solid angle. In the presence of nutation, the
path constructed by the symmetry axis is not closed, and the steady precession appears in the limit
of inﬁnite initial spin angular velocity. As a consequence, in an ideal situation of no friction, theHannay angle as a pure geometric effect does not exist in the superposed motion of precession and
nutation.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0101149
I. INTRODUCTION
The motion of a symmetric top under the inﬂuence of uni-
form gravity, called a heavy symmetric top,1is a well-
known problem of classical mechanics and is discussed inmost textbooks from elementary to advanced levels. Whilethe essential dynamics of heavy symmetric tops is well
understood, there is an interesting point associated with the
motion of a spinning top that has not received much atten-tion, namely, the geometric aspect of the dynamics of thetop. This is known as the Hannay angle,
2which is a classical
analog to the quantum geometric phase or Berry phase.3,4
According to the classical adiabatic theorem,5,6when a
system undergoing a cyclic motion is coupled to anothercyclic motion called a parametric motion in such a way thatthe period of the parametric motion is much longer than thatof the system, the periodic motion of the system is almost
preserved during the full cycle of the parameter; this is
described below for the case of a spinning top. Hannay
2used
this theorem to show that after one period of the parametricmotion, the angle variable (the conjugate quantity to the
action variable) of the periodic system acquires a phase shift
composed of two parts termed the dynamical angle and geo-metric angle. The dynamical angle depends on the period,but the geometric angle is time-independent and is deter-
mined by the geometric nature of the parametric motion.
This geometric contribution to the total phase shift of theangle variable is called the Hannay angle.
A representative example of this effect is the Foucault
pendulum, in which the angular difference between the ini-
tial and ﬁnal orientations of the oscillation plane after one
complete rotation of the Earth becomes the Hannay angle,and is equivalent to the solid angle subtended by a closedloop swept out by the axis of the pendulum for one day.
7The
geometric phase of the Foucault pendulum has been exten-
sively studied, but there are not many articles about theHannay angle of the heavy symmetric top except the seminalpaper by Hannay
2and a paper by Berry and Shukla.8
Hannay gave a qualitative description of the existence of the
geometric angle in a top: When a spinning symmetric top
with a ﬁxed end is manually driven to follow a closed path,it can have the geometric phase of solid angle encircled by
the axis of the top; this is explained by the parallel transport
of a vector on a unit sphere (see Sec. 