In the analytical solution, the
modulation period depends not only on the dynamical parameters but also on the pendulum’sinitial release position, which is typical of nonlinear systems. Finally, we build a simple apparatus
and conduct a quantitative experiment. The approximate analytical solutions exhibit the same
trends as the numerical results and experimental data. After adding linear dissipation, thenumerical and experimental results match fairly well. This system can serve as an instructive
demonstration as well as a nonlinear dynamics research project for undergraduate students.
#2022
Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0010391
I. INTRODUCTION
The trajectory of an ideal two-dimensional asymmetric pen-
dulum is a Lissajous ﬁgure, the superposition of two indepen-dent simple harmonic motions. A common example of an
asymmetric pendulum is a “Y-suspended” pendulum.1–3When
the frequency ratio of the two oscillations x1=x2is a rational
number, the trajectory will be stationary. When x1=x2is not a
rational number, the motion is quasi-periodic, and the trajec-tory varies with time due to a growing phase drift.4Singh et al.
observed that the quasi-periodic motion of a 2D asymmetric
pendulum shifted from planar to elliptical and back to planaragain.5The period in which the pendulum returned to the
planar motion was related to the strength of the symmetry
breaking introduced by an added spring.
Once linear coupling is introduced to an oscillating system
with two degrees of freedom, such as by connecting two pen-
dulums with a weak spring, two normal modes result.6The
resultant motion is described as a linear superposition of thetwo normal modes. If the frequencies of these two modes are
slightly different, “beat” motion arises, in which the ampli-
tudes of the pendulums vary slowly and the energy is trans-ferred cyclically between them.
If a real asymmetric pendulum is observed, perfectly inde-
pendent motions are very unlikely to occur. The conversion
between radial and azimuthal oscillations is common forasymmetric pendulums. However, the nonlinear coupling
between the two oscillations is often overlooked. Here, we
study the dynamics of such a pendulum with weak nonlinearcoupling.
The pendulum is shown in Fig. 1(a). Using a string, a bob
is suspended from the end of an elastic rod that is ﬁxed to an
iron stand. The rod is supported with another taut string to
avoid vertical deﬂection. Because the rod moves synchro-
nously with the Bob (this will be shown in Sec. 