Interested In
Application for calculation of mean aerodynamic chord of arbitrary wing planform
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2016)
CP violation
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 1981)
CP VIOLA TION
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2000) 04 October 2023 22:48:38
RESOURCE LETTER
Resource Letters are guides for college and university physicists, astronomers, and other scientists to literature, websites, and other teaching a ids.
Each Resource Letter focuses on a particular topic and is intended to help teachers improve course content in a speciﬁc ﬁeld of physics or tointroduce nonspecialists to this ﬁeld. The Resource Letters Editorial Board meets annually to choose topics for which Resource Letters will be
commissioned during the ensuing year. Items in the Resource Letter below are labeled with the letter E to indicate elementary level or material of
general interest to persons seeking to become informed in the ﬁeld, the letter I to indicate intermediate level or somewhat specialized material, or t he
letter A to indicate advanced or specialized material. No Resource Letter is meant to be exhaustive and complete; in time there may be more than one
Resource Letter on a given subject. A complete list by ﬁeld of all Resource Letters published to date is at the website <http://web.mit.edu/rhprice/
www/>. Suggestions for future Resource Letters, including those of high pedagogical value, are welcome and should be sent to Professor Mario
Belloni, Editor, AJP Resource Letters, Davidson College, Department of Physics, Box 6910, Davidson, NC 28035; e-mail: mabelloni@davidson.edu.
Resource Letter CP-3: Computational physics
Timothy J. Atherton
Department of Physics and Astronomy, Tufts University, 574 Boston Ave, Medford, Massachusetts 02155
(Received 28 June 2022; accepted 19 October 2022)
This Resource Letter provides information and guidance for those looking to incorporate
computation into their courses or to reﬁne their own computational practice. We begin with general
resources, including policy documents and supportive organizations. We then survey efforts to
integrate computation across the curriculum as well as provide information for instructors lookingto teach a computational physics course speciﬁcally. An overview of education research into
computation in physics, including materials from beyond Physics Education Research, is then
provided, followed by suggestions for tools, languages, and environments. We conclude with someemerging topics for which only preliminary resources exist but represent important topics for
future innovation.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0106476
I. INTRODUCTION
This Resource Letter aims to help a diverse audience dis-
cover resources to help them in their practice and education,
namely, high school and college physics instructors aiming toincorporate computing into their courses, those looking to
teach a course speciﬁcally on computational physics, educa-
tion researchers interested in work on computation in physics,
and, ﬁnally but perhaps most importantly, those physicists
including students interested in broadening their view on com-
puting in physics more generally and acquiring new tools and
skills for their work. As I discuss below, the word computing
is used here in a broad sense to cover the many ways com-
puters are used in physics. In prior Computational Physics
Resource Letters,1,2many of the resources provided (and their
updated versions) are still of considerable value. Much in
those earlier Letters in fact seems remarkably prescient:
Published in 1995, de Vries’s letter CP-11discusses the tre-
mendous potential of neural networks for physics applications,
for example. Now grouped with other machine learning meth-ods and part of the emerging discipline of data science, their
potential alluded to in CP-1 has only recently begun to be
fully realized in physics as improved hardware, algorithms,
and datasets have become available.
Similarly visionary, in CP-2, Rubin Landau argues that
computation represents a third avenue of physics knowledgeproduction distinct from experiment and theory, and framed
computational physics as a synthesis of applied math, com-
puter science, and physics. In highlighting its highly interdis-
ciplinary nature, and also its epistemic role, Landau
foreshadows much recent work on thinking of howcomputing is done in physics, i.e., the skills and practices
necessary rather than simply tools and problems.
Taking into account important developments since the earlier
Letters, I have broadened the scope of this new Resource Letter
in a number of ways that aim to be useful to educators. There
now exist signiﬁcant repositories of materials and supportivecommunities for educators and an emerging body of educationresearch on computational education, including physics educa-tion research (PER) speciﬁcally. Even so, integrating computa-tion remains challenging and instructors experience manybarriers that may prevent them from succeeding.
140–142Rather
than focusing entirely on computational physics courses, I, there-
fore, aim to help diminish some of these barriers by providingresources that are valuable for integrating computation into anyphysics course and note the many recommendations to do so.
3–7
In arguing why integration of computation into the physics
curriculum is so necessary, I will go further than Landau:Computation is so interwoven into essentially all aspects ofphysics knowledge production that it almost cannot be mean-
ingfully disentangled because computers are used to build theo-
ries, design experiments, model phenomena, collect, analyze,visualize data, and much more. In this Letter, I adopt a verybroad view of computing in physics, including all these usesand not just computational problems, algorithms, or coding. Ibelieve that this enriched view of computation requires a verydifferent kind of classroom from the traditional one: One in
which students are doing physics with computers and where
students have the opportunity to engage in the various episte-mic practices of physics. It repositions the instructor as a fellowscientist who facilitates discovery rather than the sole source ofknowledge and authority.
7 Am. J. Phys. 91(1), January 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 7 04 October 2023 22:48:38
Achieving this vision will require paying attention to: who
is doing computation necessitating considerations of diver-
sity, equity, inclusion, and justice (DEIJ); what is happening
andhow including practices and active learning techniques
as well as insights from math and computer science educa-
tion; whyfocusing on objectives of inquiry and standards of
evidence; and for whom inviting questions of communica-
tion, outcomes, professional preparation, and the social con-
text of science. Certain emerging areas like quantum
computing even call into question what the computer of the
future even will be! I sincerely hope readers will, therefore,
read this Letter not just for information but as an invitationto innovate further with their pedagogy and practice to
achieve some of these goals.
For those entirely new to the idea of integrating computa-
tion into their courses, may I suggest a few resources that
form particularly good starting points: A recent AAPT
report, Ref. 3, provides general recommendations. PICUP,
Ref. 14, is a supportive community of educators at various
stages of integrating computation into their courses and also
an impressive online repository of examples. Simple, ready
to go simulations with no coding are available throughPhET.
18Speciﬁc resources for K-12 and introductory
courses are found in Secs. 