Interested In
Laser cutting of wood and wood composites - Evaluation of cut quality and comparison to conventional
wood cutting techniques
PICALO
Van E. W ood
Laser incision of woods: Ef fects on liquid penetration
ICALEO 04 October 2023 22:56:04
Teaching physics in the woodsa)
Fr/C19ed/C19eric Bouquet,b)Julien Bobroff,c)Lou-Andreas Etienne,d)and Clara Vardone)
Universit /C19e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, Orsay 91405, France
(Received 24 January 2023; accepted 1 June 2023)
We developed a two-day physics class that uses a nearby forest as a teaching location. Using low-
cost material, students design and carry out physics projects outside of the usual controlledenvironment that is a classroom. In this way, they come to realize that physics can be used to
understand the real world. They organize and present their results in an original format, an exhibit
they collectively build. This project is an introduction to the role physics can play in exploring
environmental issues, incorporating a sensitive and positive aspect which is important in this time
of environmental crisis.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0143470
I. INTRODUCTION
Universities cannot ignore the environmental crisis and
need to adapt their curricula.1,2In France, it will be manda-
tory after 2027 to offer classes covering the notions of sus-
tainability and environmental crisis in every undergraduateprogram.3Physics, as a discipline, offers several relevant
approaches to address this issue.1,4,5At the undergraduate
level, one of the most obvious entry points is the concept ofenergy, as it is already taught at this level and can be used to
address various aspects of the environment such as renew-
able energy or the greenhouse effect.6
In May 2022, the international workshop “Reimagine
Physics Teaching” brought together university physics teach-
ers to reﬂect on original ways and the possible evolution of
teaching physics.7,8One of the outcomes of this workshop
was the idea for a new exercise, taking place largely in a for-
est and letting students look at the forest with the physicist’s
eye. The goal is to demonstrate the usefulness of physics totackle larger problems through an engaging and original
activity. Building upon this idea, we developed a new exer-
cise: In two days, students design and carry out physicsexperiments from scratch in the forest, analyze their data,
and present their results in an exhibit they build together.
