groupoids: Unfortunately, the theorem as given above does not compute the fundamental group of the circle – which is the most important basic example in algebraic topology – because the circle cannot be realised as the union of two open sets with connected intersection. This problem can be resolved by working with the fundamental groupoid π1(X,A)π_1(X,A) on a set A of base points, chosen according to the geometry of the situation. Thus for the circle, one uses two base points.[2] This groupoid consists of homotopy classes relative to the end points of paths in X joining points of A ∩ X. In particular, if X is a contractible space, and A consists of two distinct points of X, then π1(X,A)π_1(X,A) is easily seen to be isomorphic to the groupoid often written Iℐ with two vertices and exactly one morphism between any two vertices. This groupoid plays a role in the theory of groupoids analogous to that of the group of integers in the theory of groups.[3] The groupoid Iℐ also allows for groupoids a notion of homotopy: it is a unit interval object in the category of groupoids. A connected union of two non connected spaces, with set of base points The category of groupoids admits all colimits, and in particular all pushouts. Theorem. Let the topological space X be covered by the interiors of two subspaces X1, X2 and let A be a set which meets each path component of X1, X2 and X0 = X1 ∩ X2. Then A meets each path component of X and the diagram P of morphisms induced by inclusion is a pushout diagram in the category of groupoids.[4] This theorem gives the transition from topology to algebra, in determining completely the fundamental groupoid π1(X,A)π_1(X,A); one then has to use algebra and combinatorics to determine a fundamental group at some basepoint. One interpretation of the theorem is that it computes homotopy 1-types. To see its utility, one can easily find cases where X is connected but is the union of the interiors of two subspaces, each with say 402 path components and whose intersection has say 1004 path components. The interpretation of this theorem as a calculational tool for "fundamental groups" needs some development of 'combinatorial groupoid theory'.[5][6] This theorem implies the calculation of the fundamental group of the circle as the group of integers, since the group of integers is obtained from the groupoid Iℐ by identifying, in the category of groupoids, its two vertices. There is a version of the last theorem when X is covered by the union of the interiors of a family Uλ:λ∈Λ{U_λ:λ∈Λ} of subsets.[7][8] The conclusion is that if A meets each path component of all 1,2,3-fold intersections of the sets Uλ_λ, then A meets all path components of X and the diagram ⨆(λ,μ)∈Λ2π1(Uλ∩Uμ,A)⇉⨆λ∈Λπ1(Uλ,A)→π1(X,A)_(λ,μ)∈Λ^2π_1(U_λ_μ,A)⇉_λ∈Λπ_1(U_λ,A)→π_1(X,A) of morphisms induced by inclusions is a coequaliser in the category of groupoids. [...] people still obstinately persist, when calculating with fundamental groups, in fixing a single base point, instead of cleverly choosing a whole packet of points which is invariant under the symmetries of the situation, which thus get lost on the way. In certain situations (such as descent theorems for fundamental groups à la Van Kampen) it is much more elegant, even indispensable for understanding something, to work with fundamental groupoids with respect to a suitable packet of base points [...]— Alexander Grothendieck, Esquisse d'un Programme (Section 2, English translation) Equivalent