layering: Lipton & Tarjan (1979) augment the given planar graph by additional edges, if necessary, so that it becomes maximal planar (every face in a planar embedding is a triangle). They then perform a breadth-first search, rooted at an arbitrary vertex v, and partition the vertices into levels by their distance from v. If l1_1 is the median level (the level such that the numbers of vertices at higher and lower levels are both at most n/2/2) then there must be levels l0_0 and l2_2 that are O(n)(√(n)) steps above and below l1_1 respectively and that contain O(n)(√(n)) vertices, respectively, for otherwise there would be more than n vertices in the levels near l1_1. They show that there must be a separator S formed by the union of l0_0 and l2_2, the endpoints of an edge e of G that does not belong to the breadth-first search tree and that lies between the two levels, and the vertices on the two breadth-first search tree paths from the endpoints of e back up to level l0_0. The size of the separator S constructed in this way is at most 8n≈2.83n√(8n)≈2.83√(n). The vertices of the separator and the two disjoint subgraphs can be found in linear time.[4] This proof of the separator theorem applies as well to weighted planar graphs, in which each vertex has a non-negative cost. The graph may be partitioned into three sets A, S, and B such that A and B each have at most 2/32/3 of the total cost and S has O(n)(√(n)) vertices, with no edges from A and B.[4] By analysing a similar separator construction more carefully, Djidjev (1982) shows that the bound on the size of S can be reduced to 6n≈2.45n√(6n)≈2.45√(n).[2] Holzer et al. (2009) suggest a simplified version of this approach: they augment the graph to be maximal planar and construct a breadth first search tree as before. Then, for each edge e that is not part of the tree, they form a cycle by combining e with the tree path that connects its endpoints. They then use as a separator the vertices of one of these cycles. Although this approach cannot be guaranteed to find a small separator for planar graphs of high diameter, their experiments indicate that it outperforms the Lipton–Tarjan and Djidjev breadth-first layering methods on many types of planar graph.[5] Simple cycle