theorem: Brooks' theorem states that any connected graph with maximum degree Δ has a Δ-coloring, with two exceptions (complete graphs and odd cycles). However, this coloring may in general be far from equitable. Paul Erdős (1964) conjectured that an equitable coloring is possible with only one more color: any graph with maximum degree Δ has an equitable coloring with Δ + 1 colors. The case Δ = 2 is straightforward (any union of paths and cycles may be equitably colored by using a repeated pattern of three colors, with minor adjustments to the repetition when closing a cycle) and the case Δ + 1= n/3 had previously been solved by Corrádi & Hajnal (1963). The full conjecture was proven by Hajnal & Szemerédi (1970), and is now known as the Hajnal–Szemerédi theorem. Their original proof was long and complicated; a simpler proof was given by Kierstead & Kostochka (2008). A polynomial time algorithm for finding equitable colorings with this many colors was described by Kierstead and Kostochka; they credit Marcelo Mydlarz and Endre Szemerédi with a prior unpublished polynomial time algorithm. Kierstead and Kostochka also announce but do not prove a strengthening of the theorem, to show that an equitable k-coloring exists whenever every two adjacent vertices have degrees adding to at most 2k + 1. Meyer (1973) conjectured a form of Brooks' theorem for equitable coloring: every connected graph with maximum degree Δ has an equitable coloring with Δ or fewer colors, with the exceptions of complete graphs and odd cycles. A strengthened version of the conjecture states that each such graph has an equitable coloring with exactly Δ colors, with one additional exception, a complete bipartite graph in which both sides of the bipartition have the same odd number of vertices.[1] Seymour (1974) proposed a strengthening of the Hajnal–Szemerédi theorem that also subsumes Dirac's theorem that dense graphs are Hamiltonian: he conjectured that, if every vertex in an n-vertex graph has at least kn/(k + 1) neighbors, then the graph contains as a subgraph the graph formed by connecting vertices that are at most k steps apart in an n-cycle. The case k = 1 is Dirac's theorem itself. The Hajnal–Szemerédi theorem may be recovered from this conjecture by applying the conjecture for larger values of k to the complement graph of a given graph, and using as color classes contiguous subsequences of vertices from the n-cycle. Seymour's conjecture has been approximately proven, i.e. for graphs where every vertex has at least kn/(k + 1)+o(n) neighbors.[4] The proof uses several deep tools including the Hajnal–Szemerédi theorem itself. Yet another generalization of the Hajnal–Szemerédi theorem is the Bollobás–Eldridge–Catlin conjecture (or BEC-conjecture for short).[5] This states that if G1 and G2 are graphs on n vertices with maximum degree Δ1 and Δ2 respectively, and if (Δ1 + 1)(Δ2 + 1) ≤ n+1, then G1 and G2 can be packed. That is, G1 and G2 can be represented on the same set of n vertices with no edges in common. The Hajnal–Szemerédi theorem is the special case of this conjecture in which G2 is a disjoint union of cliques. Catlin (1974) provides a similar but stronger condition on Δ1 and Δ2 under which such a packing can be guaranteed to exist. Special classes of