2D: 2D x-tal with thermal fluctuations of particle positions. Red lines symbolize lattice axis, and green arrows symbolize the deviations of equilibrium positions. The image shows a (quasi-) two-dimensional crystal of colloidal particles. These are micrometre-sized particles dispersed in water and sedimented on a flat interface, thus they can perform Brownian motions only within a plane. The sixfold crystalline order is easy to detect on a local scale, since the logarithmic increase of displacements is rather slow. The deviations from the (red) lattice axis are easy to detect, too, here shown as green arrows. The deviations are basically given by the elastic lattice vibrations (acoustic phonons). A direct experimental proof of Mermin–Wagner–Hohenberg fluctuations would be, if the displacements increase logarithmic with the distance of a locally fitted coordinate frame (blue). This logarithmic divergence goes along with an algebraic (slow) decay of positional correlations. The spatial order of a 2D crystal is called quasi-long-range (see also such hexatic phase for the phase behaviour of 2D ensembles). Interestingly, significant signatures of Mermin–Wagner–Hohenberg fluctuations have not been found in crystals but in disordered amorphous systems.[6][7][8] This work did not investigate the logarithmic displacements of lattice sites (which are difficult to quantify for a finite system size), but the magnitude of the mean squared displacement of the particles as function of time. This way, the displacements are not analysed in space but in the time domain. The theoretical background is given by D. Cassi, as well as F. Merkl and H. Wagner.[9][10] This work analyses the recurrence probability of random walks and spontaneous symmetry breaking in various dimensions. The finite recurrence probability of a random walk in one and two dimension shows a dualism to the lack of perfect long-range order in one and two dimensions, while the vanishing recurrence probability of a random walk in 3D is dual to existence of perfect long-range order and the possibility of symmetry breaking.