Natural: In fluids, the phonon is longitudinal and it is the Goldstone boson of the spontaneously broken Galilean symmetry. In solids, the situation is more complicated; the Goldstone bosons are the longitudinal and transverse phonons and they happen to be the Goldstone bosons of spontaneously broken Galilean, translational, and rotational symmetry with no simple one-to-one correspondence between the Goldstone modes and the broken symmetries. In magnets, the original rotational symmetry (present in the absence of an external magnetic field) is spontaneously broken such that the magnetization points in a specific direction. The Goldstone bosons then are the magnons, i.e., spin waves in which the local magnetization direction oscillates. The pions are the pseudo-Goldstone bosons that result from the spontaneous breakdown of the chiral-flavor symmetries of QCD effected by quark condensation due to the strong interaction. These symmetries are further explicitly broken by the masses of the quarks so that the pions are not massless, but their mass is significantly smaller than typical hadron masses. The longitudinal polarization components of the W and Z bosons correspond to the Goldstone bosons of the spontaneously broken part of the electroweak symmetry SU(2)⊗U(1), which, however, are not observable.[nb 1] Because this symmetry is gauged, the three would-be Goldstone bosons are absorbed by the three gauge bosons corresponding to the three broken generators; this gives these three gauge bosons a mass and the associated necessary third polarization degree of freedom. This is described in the Standard Model through the Higgs mechanism. An analogous phenomenon occurs in superconductivity, which served as the original source of inspiration for Nambu, namely, the photon develops a dynamical mass (expressed as magnetic flux exclusion from a superconductor), cf. the Ginzburg–Landau theory. Primordial fluctuations during inflation can be viewed as Goldstone bosons arising due to the spontaneous symmetry breaking of time translation symmetry of a de Sitter universe. These fluctuations in the inflaton scalar field subsequently seed cosmic structure formation.[7] Ricciardi and Umezawa proposed in 1967 a general theory (quantum brain) about the possible brain mechanism of memory storage and retrieval in terms of Nambu–Goldstone bosons.[8] This theory was subsequently extended in 1995 by Giuseppe Vitiello taking into account that the brain is an "open" system (the dissipative quantum model of the brain).[9] Applications of spontaneous symmetry breaking and of Goldstone's theorem to biological systems, in general, have been published by E. Del Giudice, S. Doglia, M. Milani, and G. Vitiello,[10][11] and by E. Del Giudice, G. Preparata and G. Vitiello.[12] Mari Jibu and Kunio Yasue[13] and Giuseppe Vitiello,[14] based on these findings, discussed the implications for consciousness.