1820: In the Geometry paper, set on the second morning of the papers for candidates for the Gold Medal in the General Examination of the University of Dublin in October 1820, the following three problems appear. Question 10. Three equilateral triangles are thus constructed on the sides of a given triangle, A, B, D, the lines joining their centres, C, C', C" form an equilateral triangle. [The accompanying diagram shows the equilateral triangles placed outwardly.] Question 11. If the three equilateral triangles are constructed as in the last figure, the lines joining their centres will also form an equilateral triangle. [The accompanying diagram shows the equilateral triangles places inwardly.] Question 12. To investigate the relation between the area of the given triangle and the areas of these two equilateral triangles. These problems are recorded in Dublin problems: a collection of questions proposed to the candidates for the gold medal at the general examinations, from 1816 to 1822 inclusive. Which is succeeded by an account of the fellowship examination, in 1823 (G. and W. B. Whittaker, London, 1823)[11] Question 1249 in the Gentleman's Diary; or Mathematical Repository for 1829 (so appearing in late 1828) takes up the theme, with solutions appearing in the issue for the following year. One of the solvers, T. S. Davies then generalized the result in Question 1265 that year, presenting his own solution the following year, drawing on a paper he had already contributed to the Philosophical Magazine in 1826. There are no cross-references in this material to that described above. However, there are several items of cognate interest in the problem pages of the popular almanacs both going back to at least the mid-1750s (Moss) and continuing on to the mid-1860s (Mason), as alluded to above. As it happens, Napoleon's name is mentioned in connection with this result in no less a work of reference than Chambers's Encyclopaedia as early as 1867 (Vol. IX, towards the close of the entry on triangles). Another remarkable property of triangles, known as Napoleon's problem is as follows: if on any triangle three equilateral triangles are described, and the centres of gravity of these three be joined, the triangle thus formed is equilateral, and has its centre of gravity coincident with that of the original triangle.[12] But then the result had appeared, with proof, in a textbook by at least 1834 (James Thomson's Euclid, pp. 255–256 [13]). In an endnote (p. 372), Thomason adds This curious proposition I have not met with, except in the Dublin Problems, published in 1823, where it is inserted without demonstration. In the second edition (1837), Thomson extended the endnote by providing proof from a former student in Belfast: The following is an outline of a very easy and neat proof it by Mr. Adam D. Glasgow of Belfast, a former student of mine of great taste and talent for mathematical pursuits: Thus, Thomson does not appear aware of the appearance of the problem in the Ladies' Diary for 1825 or the Gentleman's Diary for 1829 (just as J. S. Mackay was to remain unaware of the latter appearance, with its citation of Dublin Problems, while noting the former; readers of the American Mathematical Monthly have a pointer to Question 1249 in the Gentleman's Diary from R. C. Archibald in the issue for January 1920, p. 41, fn. 7, although the first published solution in the Ladies Diary for 1826 shows that even Archibald was not omniscient in matters of priority). Common