On algebraic independence of exponentials of linearly independent algebraic numbers over Q This article may be too technical for most readers to understand. Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts, without removing the technical details. (September 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) Part of a series of articles on themathematical constant π 3.1415926535897932384626433... Uses Area of a circle Circumference Use in other formulae Properties Irrationality Transcendence Value Less than 22/7 Approximations Madhava's correction term Memorization People Archimedes Liu Hui Zu Chongzhi Aryabhata Madhava Jamshīd al-Kāshī Ludolph van Ceulen François Viète Seki Takakazu Takebe Kenko William Jones John Machin William Shanks Srinivasa Ramanujan John Wrench Chudnovsky brothers Yasumasa Kanada History Chronology A History of Pi In culture Indiana Pi Bill Pi Day Related topics Squaring the circle Basel problem Six nines in π Other topics related to π vte Part of a series of articles on themathematical constant e Properties Natural logarithm Exponential function Applications compound interest Euler's identity Euler's formula half-lives exponential growth and decay Defining e proof that e is irrational representations of e Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem People John Napier Leonhard Euler Related topics Schanuel's conjecture vte In transcendental number theory, the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem is a result that is very useful in establishing the transcendence of numbers. It states the following: Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem — if α1, ..., αn are algebraic numbers that are linearly independent over the rational numbers Qℚ, then eα1, ..., eαn are algebraically independent over Qℚ. In other words, the extension field Q(eα1,…,eαn)ℚ(e^α_1,…,e^α_n) has transcendence degree n over Qℚ. An equivalent formulation (Baker 1990, Chapter 1, Theorem 1.4), is the following: An equivalent formulation — If α1, ..., αn are distinct algebraic numbers, then the exponentials eα1, ..., eαn are linearly independent over the algebraic numbers. This equivalence transforms a linear relation over the algebraic numbers into an algebraic relation over Qℚ by using the fact that a symmetric polynomial whose arguments are all conjugates of one another gives a rational number. The theorem is named for Ferdinand von Lindemann and Karl Weierstrass. Lindemann proved in 1882 that eα is transcendental for every non-zero algebraic number α, thereby establishing that π is transcendental (see below).[1] Weierstrass proved the above more general statement in 1885.[2] The theorem, along with the Gelfond–Schneider theorem, is extended by Baker's theorem,[3] and all of these would be further generalized by Schanuel's conjecture. Naming