In the theory of von Neumann algebras, the Kaplansky density theorem, due to Irving Kaplansky, is a fundamental approximation theorem. The importance and ubiquity of this technical tool led Gert Pedersen to comment in one of his books[1] that, 

The density theorem is Kaplansky's great gift to mankind. It can be used every day, and twice on Sundays.

Formal statement[edit]
Let K− denote the strong-operator closure of a set K in B(H), the set of bounded operators on the Hilbert space H, and let (K)1 denote the intersection of K with the unit ball of B(H).

Kaplansky density theorem.[2] If A is a self-adjoint algebra of operators in B(H)(H), then each element a in the unit ball of the strong-operator closure of A is in the strong-operator closure of the unit ball of A. In other words, (A)1−=(A−)1(A)_1^-=(A^-)_1. If h is a self-adjoint operator in (A−)1(A^-)_1, then h is in the strong-operator closure of the set of self-adjoint operators in (A)1(A)_1.
The Kaplansky density theorem can be used to formulate some approximations with respect to the strong operator topology.
1) If h is a positive operator in (A−)1, then h is in the strong-operator closure of the set of self-adjoint operators in (A+)1, where A+ denotes the set of positive operators in A.
2) If A is a C*-algebra acting on the Hilbert space H and u is a unitary operator in A−, then u is in the strong-operator closure of the set of unitary operators in A.
In the density theorem and 1) above, the results also hold if one considers a ball of radius r > 0, instead of the unit ball.

Proof[edit]
The standard proof uses the fact that a bounded continuous real-valued function f is strong-operator continuous. In other words, for a net {aα} of self-adjoint operators in A, the continuous functional calculus a → f(a) satisfies,

limf(aα)=f(limaα)(a_α)=f(_α)
in the strong operator topology. This shows that self-adjoint part of the unit ball in A− can be approximated strongly by self-adjoint elements in A. A matrix computation in M2(A) considering the self-adjoint operator with entries 0 on the diagonal and a and a* at the other positions, then removes the self-adjointness restriction and proves the theorem.

See also[edit]
Jacobson density theorem
Notes[edit]


^ Pg. 25; Pedersen, G. K., C*-algebras and their automorphism groups, London Mathematical Society Monographs, ISBN 978-0125494502.

^ Theorem 5.3.5; Richard Kadison, Fundamentals of the Theory of Operator Algebras, Vol. I : Elementary Theory, American Mathematical Society. ISBN 978-0821808191.


References[edit]
Kadison, Richard, Fundamentals of the Theory of Operator Algebras, Vol. I : Elementary Theory, American Mathematical Society. ISBN 978-0821808191.
V.F.R.Jones von Neumann algebras; incomplete notes from a course.
M. Takesaki Theory of Operator Algebras I ISBN 3-540-42248-X
vteFunctional analysis (topics – glossary)Spaces
Banach
Besov
Fréchet
Hilbert
Hölder
Nuclear
Orlicz
Schwartz
Sobolev
Topological vector
Properties
Barrelled
Complete
Dual (Algebraic/Topological)
Locally convex
Reflexive
Separable
Theorems
Hahn–Banach
Riesz representation
Closed graph
Uniform boundedness principle
Kakutani fixed-point
Krein–Milman
Min–max
Gelfand–Naimark
Banach–Alaoglu
Operators
Adjoint
Bounded
Compact
Hilbert–Schmidt
Normal
Nuclear
Trace class
Transpose
Unbounded
Unitary
Algebras
Banach algebra
C*-algebra
Spectrum of a C*-algebra
Operator algebra
Group algebra of a locally compact group
Von Neumann algebra
Open problems
Invariant subspace problem
Mahler's conjecture
Applications
Hardy space
Spectral theory of ordinary differential equations
Heat kernel
Index theorem
Calculus of variations
Functional calculus
Integral operator
Jones polynomial
Topological quantum field theory
Noncommutative geometry
Riemann hypothesis
Distribution (or Generalized functions)
Advanced topics
Approximation property
Balanced set
Choquet theory
Weak topology
Banach–Mazur distance
Tomita–Takesaki theory

 Mathematics portal
 Category
Commons




