(1906/9): Pareto stated the first fundamental theorem in his Manuale (1906) and with more rigour in its French revision (Manuel, 1909).[10] He was the first to claim optimality under his own criterion or to support the claim by convincing arguments.[citation needed] He defines equilibrium more abstractly than Edgeworth as a state which would maintain itself indefinitely in the absence of external pressures[11] and shows that in an exchange economy it is the point at which a common tangent to the parties' indifference curves passes through the endowment.[12] His definition of optimality is given in Chap. VI: We will say that the members of a collectivity enjoy a maximum of ophelimity [i.e. of utility] at a certain position when it is impossible to move a small step away such that the ophelimity enjoyed by each individual in the collectivity increases, or such that it diminishes. [He has previously defined an increase in individual ophelimity as a move onto a higher indifference curve.] That is to say that any small step is bound to increase the ophelimity of some individuals while diminishing that of others.[13] The following paragraph gives us a theorem: For phenomena of type I [i.e. perfect competition], when equilibrium takes place at a point of tangency of indifference curves, the members of the collectivity enjoy a maximum of ophelimity. He adds that 'a rigorous proof cannot be given without the help of mathematics' and refers to his Appendix.[14] Wicksell, referring to his definition of optimality, commented: With such a definition it is almost self-evident that this so-called maximum obtains under free competition, because if, after an exchange is effected, it were possible by means of a further series of direct or indirect exchanges to produce an additional satisfaction of needs for the participators, then to that extent such a continued exchange would doubtless have taken place, and the original position could not be one of final equilibrium.[15] Pareto didn't find it so straightforward. He gives a diagrammatic argument in his text, applying solely to exchange,[16] and a 32-page mathematical argument in the Appendix[17] which Samuelson found 'not easy to follow'.[18] Pareto was hampered by not having a concept of the production–possibility frontier, whose development was due partly to his collaborator Enrico Barone.[19] His own 'indifference curves for obstacles' seem to have been a false path. Shortly after stating the first fundamental theorem, Pareto asks a question about distribution: Consider a collectivist society which seeks to maximise the ophelimity of its members. The problem divides into two parts. Firstly we have a problem of distribution: how should the goods within a society be shared between its members? And secondly, how should production be organised so that, when goods are so distributed, the members of society obtain the maximum ophelimity? His answer is an informal precursor of the second theorem: Having distributed goods according to the answer to the first problem, the state should allow the members of the collectivity to operate a second distribution, or operate it itself, in either case making sure that it is performed in conformity with the workings of free competition.[20] Enrico Barone