Theorem in calculus which relates the flux of closed surfaces to divergence over their volume "Gauss's theorem" redirects here. For the theorem concerning the electric field, see Gauss's law. "Ostrogradsky's theorem" redirects here. For the theorem concerning the linear instability of the Hamiltonian associated with a Lagrangian dependent on higher time derivatives than the first, see Ostrogradsky instability. Part of a series of articles aboutCalculus Fundamental theorem Limits Continuity Rolle's theorem Mean value theorem Inverse function theorem Differential Definitions Derivative (generalizations) Differential infinitesimal of a function total Concepts Differentiation notation Second derivative Implicit differentiation Logarithmic differentiation Related rates Taylor's theorem Rules and identities Sum Product Chain Power Quotient L'Hôpital's rule Inverse General Leibniz Faà di Bruno's formula Reynolds Integral Lists of integrals Integral transform Leibniz integral rule Definitions Antiderivative Integral (improper) Riemann integral Lebesgue integration Contour integration Integral of inverse functions Integration by Parts Discs Cylindrical shells Substitution (trigonometric, tangent half-angle, Euler) Euler's formula Partial fractions Changing order Reduction formulae Differentiating under the integral sign Risch algorithm Series Geometric (arithmetico-geometric) Harmonic Alternating Power Binomial Taylor Convergence tests Summand limit (term test) Ratio Root Integral Direct comparison Limit comparison Alternating series Cauchy condensation Dirichlet Abel Vector Gradient Divergence Curl Laplacian Directional derivative Identities Theorems Gradient Green's Stokes' Divergence generalized Stokes Multivariable Formalisms Matrix Tensor Exterior Geometric Definitions Partial derivative Multiple integral Line integral Surface integral Volume integral Jacobian Hessian Advanced Calculus on Euclidean space Generalized functions Limit of distributions Specialized Fractional Malliavin Stochastic Variations Miscellaneous Precalculus History Glossary List of topics Integration Bee Mathematical analysis Nonstandard analysis vte In vector calculus, the divergence theorem, also known as Gauss's theorem or Ostrogradsky's theorem,[1] is a theorem which relates the flux of a vector field through a closed surface to the divergence of the field in the volume enclosed. More precisely, the divergence theorem states that the surface integral of a vector field over a closed surface, which is called the "flux" through the surface, is equal to the volume integral of the divergence over the region inside the surface. Intuitively, it states that "the sum of all sources of the field in a region (with sinks regarded as negative sources) gives the net flux out of the region". The divergence theorem is an important result for the mathematics of physics and engineering, particularly in electrostatics and fluid dynamics. In these fields, it is usually applied in three dimensions. However, it generalizes to any number of dimensions. In one dimension, it is equivalent to integration by parts. In two dimensions, it is equivalent to Green's theorem. Explanation using liquid