"Vaught's test" redirects here. Not to be confused with the Tarski–Vaught test.
Not to be confused with Category theory.
In mathematical logic, a theory is categorical if it has exactly one model (up to isomorphism).[1]  Such a theory can be viewed as defining its model, uniquely characterizing the model's structure.
In first-order logic, only theories with a finite model can be categorical.  Higher-order logic contains categorical theories with an infinite model.  For example, the second-order Peano axioms are categorical, having a unique model whose domain is the set of natural numbers N.ℕ.
In model theory, the notion of a categorical theory is refined with respect to cardinality.  A theory is κ-categorical (or categorical in κ) if it has exactly one model of cardinality κ up to isomorphism. Morley's categoricity theorem is a theorem of Michael D. Morley (1965) stating that if a first-order theory in a countable language is categorical in some uncountable cardinality, then it is categorical in all uncountable cardinalities.
Saharon Shelah (1974) extended Morley's theorem to uncountable languages: if the language has cardinality κ and a theory is categorical in some uncountable cardinal greater than or equal to κ then it is categorical in all cardinalities greater than κ.


History and motivation[edit]
Oswald Veblen in 1904 defined a theory to be categorical if all of its models are isomorphic. It follows from the definition above and the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem that any first-order theory with a model of infinite cardinality cannot be categorical. One is then immediately led to the more subtle notion of κ-categoricity, which asks: for which cardinals κ is there exactly one model of cardinality κ of the given theory T up to isomorphism?  This is a deep question and significant progress was only made in 1954 when Jerzy Łoś noticed that, at least for complete theories T over countable languages with at least one infinite model, he could only find three ways for T to be κ-categorical at some κ:

T is totally categorical, i.e. T is κ-categorical for all infinite cardinals κ.
T is uncountably categorical, i.e. T is κ-categorical if and only if κ is an uncountable cardinal.
T is countably categorical, i.e. T is κ-categorical if and only if κ is a countable cardinal.
In other words, he observed that, in all the cases he could think of, κ-categoricity at any one uncountable cardinal implied κ-categoricity at all other uncountable cardinals. This observation spurred a great amount of research into the 1960s, eventually culminating in Michael Morley's famous result that these are in fact the only possibilities.  The theory was subsequently extended and refined by Saharon Shelah in the 1970s and beyond, leading to stability theory and Shelah's more general programme of classification theory.

Examples[edit]
There are not many natural examples of theories that are categorical in some uncountable cardinal. The known examples include:

Pure identity theory (with no functions, constants, predicates other than "=", or axioms).
The classic example is the theory of algebraically closed fields of a given characteristic. Categoricity does not say that all algebraically closed fields of characteristic 0 as large as the complex numbers C are the same as C; it only asserts that they are isomorphic as fields to C. It follows that although the completed p-adic closures Cp are all isomorphic as fields to C, they may (and in fact do) have completely different topological and analytic properties. The theory of algebraically closed fields of a given characteristic is not categorical in ω (the countable infinite cardinal); there are models of transcendence degree 0, 1, 2, ..., ω.
Vector spaces over a given countable field. This includes abelian groups of given prime exponent (essentially the same as vector spaces over a finite field) and divisible torsion-free abelian groups (essentially the same as vector spaces over the rationals).
The theory of the set of natural numbers with a successor function.
There are also examples of theories that are categorical in ω but not categorical in uncountable cardinals. 
The simplest example is the theory of an equivalence relation with exactly two equivalence classes, both of which are infinite. Another example is the theory of dense linear orders with no endpoints; Cantor proved that any such countable linear order is isomorphic to the rational numbers: see Cantor's isomorphism theorem.

Properties[edit]
Every categorical theory is complete.[2] However, the converse does not hold.[3]
Any theory T categorical in some infinite cardinal κ is very close to being complete. More precisely, the Łoś–Vaught test states that if a satisfiable theory  has no finite models and is categorical in some infinite cardinal κ at least equal to the cardinality of its language, then the theory is complete.  The reason is that all infinite models are first-order equivalent to some model of cardinal κ by the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem, and so are all equivalent as the theory is categorical in κ. Therefore, the theory is complete as all models are equivalent.  The assumption that the theory have no finite models is necessary.[4]

See also[edit]
Spectrum of a theory
Notes[edit]


^ Some authors define a theory to be categorical if all of its models are isomorphic.  This definition makes the inconsistent theory categorical, since it has no models and therefore vacuously meets the criterion.

^ Monk 1976, p. 349.

^ Mummert, Carl (2014-09-16). "Difference between completeness and categoricity".

^ Marker (2002) p. 42


References[edit]
Chang, Chen Chung; Keisler, H. Jerome (1990) [1973], Model Theory, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, Elsevier, ISBN 978-0-444-88054-3
Corcoran, John (1980), "Categoricity", History and Philosophy of Logic, 1 (1–2): 187–207, doi:10.1080/01445348008837010
Hodges, Wilfrid, "First-order Model Theory", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2005 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).
Marker, David (2002), Model theory: An introduction, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 217, New York, NY: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-98760-6, Zbl 1003.03034
Monk, J. Donald (1976), Mathematical Logic, Springer-Verlag, doi:10.1007/978-1-4684-9452-5
Morley, Michael (1965), "Categoricity in Power", Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, American Mathematical Society, Vol. 114, No. 2, 114 (2): 514–538, doi:10.2307/1994188, ISSN 0002-9947, JSTOR 1994188
Palyutin, E.A. (2001) [1994], "Categoricity in cardinality", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS Press
Shelah, Saharon (1974), "Categoricity of uncountable theories", Proceedings of the Tarski Symposium (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. XXV, Univ. of California, Berkeley, Calif., 1971), Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, vol. 25, Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical Society, pp. 187–203, doi:10.1090/pspum/025/0373874, ISBN 9780821814253, MR 0373874
Shelah, Saharon (1990) [1978], Classification theory and the number of nonisomorphic models, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics (2nd ed.), Elsevier, ISBN 978-0-444-70260-9 (IX, 1.19, pg.49)
Veblen, Oswald (1904), "A System of Axioms for Geometry", Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, American Mathematical Society, Vol. 5, No. 3, 5 (3): 343–384, doi:10.2307/1986462, ISSN 0002-9947, JSTOR 1986462
vteMathematical logicGeneral
Axiom
list
Cardinality
First-order logic
Formal proof
Formal semantics
Foundations of mathematics
Information theory
Lemma
Logical consequence
Model
Theorem
Theory
Type theory
Theorems (list) & Paradoxes
Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems
Tarski's undefinability
Banach–Tarski paradox
Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument
Compactness
Halting problem
Lindström's
Löwenheim–Skolem
Russell's paradox
LogicsTraditional
Classical logic
Logical truth
Tautology
Proposition
Inference
Logical equivalence
Consistency
Equiconsistency
Argument
Soundness
Validity
Syllogism
Square of opposition
Venn diagram
Propositional
Boolean algebra
Boolean functions
Logical connectives
Propositional calculus
Propositional formula
Truth tables
Many-valued logic
3
Finite
∞
Predicate
First-order
list
Second-order
Monadic
Higher-order
Free
Quantifiers
Predicate
Monadic predicate calculus
Set theory
Set
Hereditary
Class
(Ur-)Element
Ordinal number
Extensionality
Forcing
Relation
Equivalence
Partition
Set operations:
Intersection
Union
Complement
Cartesian product
Power set
Identities
Types of Sets
Countable
Uncountable
Empty
Inhabited
Singleton
Finite
Infinite
Transitive
Ultrafilter
Recursive
Fuzzy
Universal
Universe
Constructible
Grothendieck
Von Neumann
Maps & Cardinality
Function/Map
Domain
Codomain
Image
In/Sur/Bi-jection
Schröder–Bernstein theorem
Isomorphism
Gödel numbering
Enumeration
Large cardinal
Inaccessible
Aleph number
Operation
Binary
Set theories
Zermelo–Fraenkel
Axiom of choice
Continuum hypothesis
General
Kripke–Platek
Morse–Kelley
Naive
New Foundations
Tarski–Grothendieck
Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel
Ackermann
Constructive
Formal systems (list),Language & Syntax
Alphabet
Arity
Automata
Axiom schema
Expression
Ground
Extension
by definition
Conservative
Relation
Formation rule
Grammar
Formula
Atomic
Closed
Ground
Open
Free/bound variable
Language
Metalanguage
Logical connective
¬
∨
∧
→
↔
=
Predicate
Functional
Variable
Propositional variable
Proof
Quantifier
∃
!
∀
rank
Sentence
Atomic
Spectrum
Signature
String
Substitution
Symbol
Function
Logical/Constant
Non-logical
Variable
Term
Theory
list
Example axiomaticsystems (list)
of arithmetic:
Peano
second-order
elementary function
primitive recursive
Robinson
Skolem
of the real numbers
Tarski's axiomatization
of Boolean algebras
canonical
minimal axioms
of geometry:
Euclidean:
Elements
Hilbert's
Tarski's
non-Euclidean
Principia Mathematica
Proof theory
Formal proof
Natural deduction
Logical consequence
Rule of inference
Sequent calculus
Theorem
Systems
Axiomatic
Deductive
Hilbert
list
Complete theory
Independence (from ZFC)
Proof of impossibility
Ordinal analysis
Reverse mathematics
Self-verifying theories
Model theory
Interpretation
Function
of models
Model
Equivalence
Finite
Saturated
Spectrum
Submodel
Non-standard model
of arithmetic
Diagram
Elementary
Categorical theory
Model complete theory
Satisfiability
Semantics of logic
Strength
Theories of truth
Semantic
Tarski's
Kripke's
T-schema
Transfer principle
Truth predicate
Truth value
Type
Ultraproduct
Validity
Computability theory
Church encoding
Church–Turing thesis
Computably enumerable
Computable function
Computable set
Decision problem
Decidable
Undecidable
P
NP
P versus NP problem
Kolmogorov complexity
Lambda calculus
Primitive recursive function
Recursion
Recursive set
Turing machine
Type theory
Related
Abstract logic
Category theory
Concrete/Abstract Category
Category of sets
History of logic
History of mathematical logic
timeline
Logicism
Mathematical object
Philosophy of mathematics
Supertask
 Mathematics portal



