proofs: The directed edge version of the theorem easily implies the other versions. To infer the directed graph vertex version, it suffices to split each vertex v into two vertices v1, v2, with all ingoing edges going to v1, all outgoing edges going from v2, and an additional edge from v1 to v2. The directed versions of the theorem immediately imply undirected versions: it suffices to replace each edge of an undirected graph with a pair of directed edges (a digon). The directed edge version in turn follows from its weighted variant, the max-flow min-cut theorem. Its proofs are often correctness proofs for max flow algorithms. It is also a special case of the still more general (strong) duality theorem for linear programs. A formulation that for finite digraphs is equivalent to the above formulation is: Let A and B be sets of vertices in a finite digraph G. Then there exists a family P of disjoint AB-paths and an AB-separating set that consists of exactly one vertex from each path in P. In this version the theorem follows in fairly easily from Kőnig's theorem: in a bipartite graph, the minimal size of a cover is equal to the maximal size of a matching. This is done as follows: replace every vertex v in the original digraph D by two vertices v' , v'', and every edge uv by the edge u'v''; additionally, include the edges v'v'' for every vertex v that is neither in A nor B. This results in a bipartite graph, whose one side consists of the vertices v' , and the other of the vertices v''. Applying Kőnig's theorem we obtain a matching M and a cover C of the same size. In particular, exactly one endpoint of each edge of M is in C. Add to C all vertices a'', for a in A, and all vertices b' , for b in B. Let P be the set of all AB-paths composed of edges uv in D such that u'v'' belongs to M. Let Q in the original graph consist of all vertices v such that both v' and v'' belong to C. It is straightforward to check that Q is an AB-separating set, that every path in the family P contains precisely one vertex from Q, and every vertex in Q lies on a path from P, as desired.[2] Infinite