230

Tools for Teaching 1994

1986: The Emergency-Facilities
Location Problem

The township of Rio Rancho has hitherto not had its own emergency
facilities.
It has secured funds to erect two emergency facilities in 1986,
each of which will combine ambulance, ﬁre, and police services. Figure 1
indicates the demand, or number of emergencies per square block, for 1985.
The “L” region in the north is an obstacle, while the rectangle in the south
is a part with a shallow pond. It takes an emergency vehicle an average of
15 seconds to go one block in the N–S direction and 20 seconds in the E–W
direction. Your task it to locate the two facilities so as to minimize the total
response time.

• Assume that the demand is concentrated at the center of the block and

that the facilities will be located on corners.

• Assume that the demand is uniformly distributed on the streets bordering
each block and that the facilities may be located anywhere on the streets.

Figure 1. A map of Rio Rancho, with number of emergencies in 1985 indicated for each block.

Other Problems of the First Ten Years

231

Comments by the Contest Director

The problem was contributed by J.C. McGrew (Dept. of Geography and
Regional Planning, Salisbury State College, Maryland). Originally, it had a
stochastic aspect, but the Chief Judge (D.R. Morrison, Dept. of Computer
Science, University of New Mexico) and I (Ben Fusaro) thought that it might
be too much for three undergraduates on a weekend. How wrong we were!
The approaches mainly took the form of an exhaustive search.

The Outstanding papers, by teams from Georgetown University, Harvey
Mudd College, Grinnell College, and Washington University, together with
commentaries, were published as follows:

Hardy, Maureen, Michael Irizarry, and Stephen Penrice. 1986. Help! To the

rescue in Rio Rancho. The UMAP Journal 7 (4) (1986): 299–307.

Special Issue: Mathematical Competition in Modeling. 1986. Mathemati-
cal Modeling: An International Journal 7 (4): 595–652. This special issue
contains all four Outstanding papers.

