240

Tools for Teaching 1994

1992: The Air-Trafﬁc-Control Radar

Problem

You are to determine the power to be radiated by an air-trafﬁc-control
radar at a major metropolitan airport. The airport authority wants to mini-
mize the power of the radar consistent with safety and cost.

The authority is constrained to operate with its existing antennae and
receiver circuitry. The only option that they are considering is upgrading
the transmitter circuits to make the radar more powerful.

The question that you are to answer is what power (in watts) must be
released by the radar to ensure detection of standard passenger aircraft at a
distance of 100 kilometers.

Antenna dish

2 meters

6 meters

1 Meter

Radar beam

Angle of 
50 milliradians

1 Meter

Transmitter/receiver

Transmitter/receiver

Angle of 1 radian

Radar beam

Antenna dish

Figure 1. Measurements for the radar system.

Technical speciﬁcations (see also Figure 1):

• The radar antenna is a section of a paraboloid of revolution with focal
length of 1 meter. Its projection onto a plane tangent to its vertex is an
ellipse with a major axis of 6 meters and a minor axis of 2 meters. The
main lobe energy beam pattern, located at the focus, is an elliptical cone
that has a major axis of one radian and a minor axis of 50 milliradians.
The antenna and beam are sketched in the ﬁgures provided below.

• The nominal class of aircraft is one that has an effective radar reﬂection
cross-section of 75 square meters. For the purposes of this problem, this

Other Problems of the First Ten Years

241

means that in your initial model, the aircraft is equivalent to a 100%
reﬂective circular disc of 75 square meters, which is centered on the axis
of the antennae and is perpendicular to it. You may want to consider
alternatives or reﬁnements to this initial model.

• The receiver circuits are sufﬁciently sensitive to process a return signal of
10 microwatts at the feed horn of the radar (which is located at the focus
of the radar antenna).

Comments by the Contest Director

The problem was contributed by John Edwards (Dept. of Mathematical
Sciences, U.S. Military Academy, West Point, NY). The problem statement
contains several ambiguities and some unrealistic information, and a major
factor in judging the papers was how the teams attempted to resolve these
issues.

The Outstanding papers were by teams from Pomona College and Uni-
versity of Colorado–Boulder. Their papers, together with commentaries,
were published in The UMAP Journal 13 (3) (1992): 205–225.

