244

Tools for Teaching 1994

1994: The Concrete Slab Problem

The U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is consider-
ing constructing dwellings of various sizes, ranging from individual houses
to large apartment complexes. A principal concern is to minimize recurring
costs to occupants, especially the costs of heating and cooling. The region
in which the construction is to take place is temperate, with a moderate
variation in temperature throughout the year.

With special construction techniques, HUD engineers can build dwell-
ings that do not need to rely on convection—that is, there is no need to rely on
opening doors or windows to assist in temperature variation. The dwellings
will be single-story, with concrete slab ﬂoors as the only foundation. You
have been hired as a consultant to analyze the temperature variation in the
concrete slab ﬂoor to determine if the temperature averaged over the ﬂoor
surface can be maintained within a prescribed comfort zone throughout the
year. If so, what size/shape of slabs will permit this?

Part 1, Floor Temperature

Consider the temperature variation in a concrete slab given that the ambi-
ent temperature varies daily within the ranges given in Table 1. Assume that
the high occurs at noon and the low at midnight. Determine if slabs can be
designed to maintain a temperature averaged over the ﬂoor surface within
the prescribed comfort zone considering radiation only. Initially, assume
that the heat transfer into the dwelling is through the exposed perimeter of
the slab and that the top and bottom of the slabs are insulated. Comment on
the appropriateness and sensitivity of these assumptions. If you cannot ﬁnd
a solution that satisﬁes Table 1, can you ﬁnd designs that satisfy a Table 1
that you propose?

Table 1.

Daily variation in temperature.

Ambient Temperature

Comfort Zone

High:

85

Low:

60

◦

◦

F

F

High:

Low:

◦

◦

76

65

F

F

Part 2, Building Temperature

Analyze the practicality of the initial assumptions and extend the analy-
sis to temperature variation within the single-story dwelling. Can the house
be kept within the comfort zone?

Other Problems of the First Ten Years

245

Part 3, Cost of Construction

Suggest a design that considers HUD’s objective of reducing or elimi-
nating heating and cooling costs, considering construction restrictions and
costs.

Comments by the Contest Director

The problem is based on a heat-diffusion problem (a slab without in-
sulation) by Murray Klamkin (Mathematics Dept., University of Alberta,
Alberta, Canada).

The Outstanding paper was by a team from North Carolina School of
Science and Mathematics. Their paper, together with a commentary, was
published in The UMAP Journal 15 (3) (1994): 207–224.

