In mathematics, the Farrell–Markushevich theorem, proved independently by O. J. Farrell (1899–1981)[1] and A. I. Markushevich (1908–1979) in 1934, is a result concerning the approximation in mean square of holomorphic functions on a bounded open set in the complex plane by complex polynomials. It states that complex polynomials form a dense subspace of the Bergman space of a domain  bounded by a simple closed Jordan curve. The Gram–Schmidt process can be used to construct an orthonormal basis in the Bergman space  and hence an explicit form of the Bergman kernel, which in turn yields an explicit Riemann mapping function for the domain.


Proof[edit]
Let Ω be the bounded Jordan domain and let  Ωn be bounded Jordan domains decreasing to Ω, with Ωn containing the closure of  Ωn + 1. By the Riemann mapping theorem there is a conformal mapping fn of Ωn onto  Ω, normalised to fix a given point in Ω with positive derivative there. By the Carathéodory kernel theorem fn(z) converges uniformly on compacta in Ω to z.[2] In fact Carathéodory's theorem implies that the inverse maps tend uniformly on compacta to z. Given a subsequence of fn, it has a subsequence, convergent on compacta in Ω. Since the inverse functions converge to z, it follows that the subsequence converges to z on compacta. Hence  fn converges to z on compacta in Ω.
As a consequence the derivative of fn tends to 1 uniformly on compacta.
Let g be a square integrable holomorphic function on  Ω, i.e. an element of the Bergman space A2(Ω). Define gn on Ωn by gn(z) = g(fn(z))fn'(z). By change of variable

‖gn‖Ωn2=‖g‖Ω2.g_n_Ω_n^2=g_Ω^2.
Let hn be the restriction of gn to Ω. Then the norm of hn is less than that of gn. Thus these norms  are uniformly bounded. Passing to a subsequence if necessary, it can therefore be assumed that hn has a weak limit in A2(Ω). On the other hand, hn tends uniformly on compacta
to g. Since the evaluation maps are continuous linear functions on  A2(Ω), g is the weak limit of hn. On the other hand, by Runge's theorem,  hn lies in the closed subspace K of A2(Ω) generated by complex polynomials. Hence g lies in the weak closure of K, which is K itself.[3]

See also[edit]
Mergelyan's theorem
Notes[edit]


^ Orin J. Farrell received his PhD (under J. L. Walsh) from Harvard University in 1930 and spent his career from 1931 at Union College with a leave of absence from January 1949 to May 1949 at the Institute for Advanced Study. See Orin J. Farrell at the Mathematics Genealogy Project; Bick, Theodore A. (1993). "A History of the Mathematics Department". Union College.; "Orin J. Farrell". Institute for Advanced Study.

^ See:
Conway 2000, pp. 150–151
Markushevich 1967, pp. 31–35

^ Conway 2000, pp. 151–152


References[edit]
Farrell, O. J. (1934), "On approximation to an analytic function by polynomials", Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 40: 908–914, doi:10.1090/s0002-9904-1934-06002-6
Markushevich, A. I. (1967), Theory of functions of a complex variable. Vol. III, Prentice–Hall
Conway, John B. (2000), A course in operator theory, Graduate Studies in Mathematics, vol. 21, American Mathematical Society, ISBN 0-8218-2065-6
vteFunctional analysis (topics – glossary)Spaces
Banach
Besov
Fréchet
Hilbert
Hölder
Nuclear
Orlicz
Schwartz
Sobolev
Topological vector
Properties
Barrelled
Complete
Dual (Algebraic/Topological)
Locally convex
Reflexive
Separable
Theorems
Hahn–Banach
Riesz representation
Closed graph
Uniform boundedness principle
Kakutani fixed-point
Krein–Milman
Min–max
Gelfand–Naimark
Banach–Alaoglu
Operators
Adjoint
Bounded
Compact
Hilbert–Schmidt
Normal
Nuclear
Trace class
Transpose
Unbounded
Unitary
Algebras
Banach algebra
C*-algebra
Spectrum of a C*-algebra
Operator algebra
Group algebra of a locally compact group
Von Neumann algebra
Open problems
Invariant subspace problem
Mahler's conjecture
Applications
Hardy space
Spectral theory of ordinary differential equations
Heat kernel
Index theorem
Calculus of variations
Functional calculus
Integral operator
Jones polynomial
Topological quantum field theory
Noncommutative geometry
Riemann hypothesis
Distribution (or Generalized functions)
Advanced topics
Approximation property
Balanced set
Choquet theory
Weak topology
Banach–Mazur distance
Tomita–Takesaki theory

 Mathematics portal
 Category
Commons




