constructions: Instead of restricting the rules of construction further, it is of equal interest to study relaxing the restrictions. These are sometimes called extended constructions. Just as geometers have studied what remains possible to construct (and how) when additional restrictions are placed on traditional construction rules - such as compass only, straightedge only, rusty compass, etc. - they have also studied what constructions becomes possible that weren't already when the natural restrictions inherent to traditional construction rules are alleviated. Questions such as "what becomes constructible", "how might it be constructed", "what are the fewest traditional rules to be broken", "what are the simplest tools needed", "which seemingly different tools are equivalent", etc. are asked. The arbitrary angle is not trisectable using traditional compass and straightedge rules, for example, but the trisection becomes constructible when allowed the additional tool of an ellipse in the plane. Some of the traditional problems such as angle trisection, doubling the cube, squaring the circle, finding cubic roots, etc., have been resolved using an expanded set of tools. In general, the objects studied to extend the scope of what is constructible have included: Non-constructible "auxiliary" curves in the plane - including any of the conic sections, cycloids, lemniscates, limaçons, the Archimedean spiral, any of the trisectrices or quadratrices, and others. Physical tools other than the compass and straightedge - generally called neuseis - which include specific tools such as the Tomahawk, markable and double-edged straightedges, graduated rulers, right triangular rulers, linkages, ellipsographs, and others. Origami, or paper-folding techniques. The ancient geometers considered the compass and straightedge constructions (known as planar constructions) as ideal and preferred. Second to that they preferred solid constructions, which included the use of conic sections, other than the circle, in the plane. They favored thirdly the use of arbitrary smooth curves in the plane, and least of all the use of neuseis (alternative physical handheld tools). It is doubtful the ancient geometers even considered paper folding. The term neusis or neusis construction may also refer to a specific tool or method employed by the ancient geometers.