lemma: If only one circle is to be given and no other special information, Steiner's theorem implies that the center of the circle must be provided along with the circle. This is done by proving the impossibility of constructing the circle's center from straightedge alone using only a single circle in the plane, without its center. An argument using projective transformations and Steiner's conic sections is used. A naïve summary of the proof is as follows. With the use of a straightedge tool, only linear projective transformations are possible, and linear projective transformations are reversible operations. Lines project onto lines under any linear projective transformation, while conic sections project onto conic sections under a linear projective transformation, but the latter are skewed such that eccentricities, foci, and centers of circles are not preserved. Under different mappings the center does not map uniquely and reversibly. This would not be the case if lines could be used to determine a circles center. As linear transformations are reversible operations and would thus produce unique results, the fact that unique results are not possible implies the impossibility of center-point constructions. The uniqueness of the constructed center would depend on additional information which makes the construction reversible. Thus it is not possible to construct everything that can be constructed with straightedge and compass with straightedge alone. Consequently, requirements on the Poncelet-Steiner theorem cannot be weakened with respect to the circle center. If the centre of the only given circle is not provided, it cannot be obtained by a straightedge alone. Many constructions are impossible with straightedge alone. Something more is necessary, and a circle with its center identified is sufficient. Alternatively, the center may be omitted with sufficient additional information. This is not a weakening of the Poncelet-Steiner theorem, merely an alternative framework. Nor is it a contradiction of Steiner's Theorem which hypothesizes only a single circle. The inclusion of this sufficient alternative information disambiguates the mappings under the projective transformations, thus allowing various Steiner constructions to recover the circle center. Some alternatives include two concentric or two intersecting circles, or three circles, or other variations wherein the provided circle(s) are devoid of their centers, but some other unique but sufficient criterion is met. In any of these cases, the center of a circle can be constructed, thereby reducing the problem to the Poncelet-Steiner theorem hypothesis (with the added convenience of having additional circles in the plane). Constructive proof