construction: In the event that the construction of the radical axis fails due to there not being an intersection point X between parallel lines j and k, which results from the coincidental placement of the midpoint M on the line AC, an alternative approach is required. One such alternative is given below with the arbitrarily chosen circle A(B) used for demonstration, along with the provided circle O(r). The circle C(D) of the radical axis construction is not depicted. To define a circle only the center and one point - any point - on the circumference is required. In principle a new point B' is constructed such that circle A(B) is equal to circle A(B' ), but point B is not equal to point B' . In essence, segment AB is rotated to AB' , for a different set of defining points for the same circle. The construction of the radical axis is begun anew with circle A(B' ) standing in for circle A(B). In this way the coincidental placement of the midpoint M (now of segment B'D ) on the line AC is avoided. Construction of a diametrically opposite point on a circle using only a straightedge. One way of going about this which satisfies most conditions is to construct point B' diametrically opposite B, collinear with a line AB: Draw the line AB (in red). Construct a parallel (in orange) of line AB through the center, point O, of the given circle. The parallel intersects the given circle at points E and F. Draw a line AO (in green), connecting the center of circle A(B) with the center of the given circle. Draw a line BE (in pink), connecting the points on the circle circumferences. In the general case, points E and F may be switched without loss of generality. Lines AO and BE intersect in a point Z. If point Z does not exist due to lines AO and BE being parallel - caused by circles A(B) and O(r) having equal radii - then refer to step 4 and switch the roles of points E and F. Draw a line FZ (in blue). Lines AB and FZ intersect at a point B' . Point B' is the desired point. In the general case it is now possible to construct the radical axis between the circles A(B' )=A(B) and C(D). This specific construction of a diametrically opposite point, however, can itself potentially fail under the right conditions - when points A, B, and O are collinear. If the final goal is to construct a diametrically opposite point, an alternative approach is required. If the goal is to resolve the limitation in the radical axis construction, one option is to attempt a similar construction on circle C(D) instead. This too may fail, if all five points are collinear. Alternatively an entirely different point B' may be determined, not necessarily a diametrically opposite one, requiring a small variation on the above construction. Intersecting a line with a circle (Construction