approach: To prove the theorem, each of the basic constructions of compass and straightedge need to be proven to be possible by using a straightedge alone (provided that a circle and its center exist in the plane), as these are the foundations of, or elementary steps for, all other constructions. That is to say, all constructions can be written as a series of steps involving these five basic constructions: Creating the line through two existing points Creating the circle through one point with centre another point Creating the point which is the intersection of two existing, non-parallel lines Creating the one or two points in the intersection of a line and a circle (if they intersect) Creating the one or two points in the intersection of two circles (if they intersect). #1 - A line through two points This can be done with a straightedge alone. Neither a compass nor a circle is required. #2 - A circle through one point with defined center It is understood that the arc of a circle cannot be drawn without a compass. A circle is considered to be given by any two points, one defining the center and one existing on the circumference at radius. Any such pair define a unique circle. In keeping with the intent of the theorem which we aim to prove, the actual circle need not be drawn but for aesthetic reasons. #3 – Intersection of two lines This construction can also be done directly with a straightedge. #4, #5 - The other constructions Thus, to prove the theorem, only constructions #4 and #5 need be proven possible using only a straightedge and a given circle with its center. Notes Any doubts about constructions #1 or #3 would apply equally to the traditional construction paradigm involving the compass, and thus are not concerns unique to the Poncelet-Steiner theorem. Construction #2 should not be of concern. The arc of the circle is only used in traditional construction paradigms for the purposes of circle-circle and circle-line intersections, thus if constructions #4 and #5 are satisfiable without the arc of the circle, then this will prove non-necessity of drawing the arc. This therefore proves that construction #2 is satisfied by a simple labeling of two points uniquely identifying the circle. Constructive