construction: The Poncelet–Steiner theorem can be contrasted with the Mohr–Mascheroni theorem, which states that any compass and straightedge construction can be performed with only a compass. The rusty compass restriction allows the use of a compass, provided it produces circles of fixed radius. Although the rusty compass constructions were explored since the 10th century, and all of Euclid was shown to be constructable with a rusty compass by the 17th century, the Poncelet-Steiner theorem proves that the rusty compass and straightedge together are more than sufficient for any and all Euclidean construction. Indeed, the rusty compass becomes a tool simplifying constructions over merely the straightedge and single circle. Viewed the other way, the Poncelet-Steiner theorem not only fixes the width of the rusty compass, but ensures that the compass breaks after its first use. The requirement that one circle with its center provided has been since generalized to include alternative but equally restrictive conditions. In one such alternative, the entire circle is not required at all. In 1904, Francesco Severi proved that any small arc (of the circle), together with the centre, will suffice.[4] This construction breaks the rusty compass at any point before the first circle is completed, but after it has begun, and still all constructions remain possible. Thus, the conditions hypothesizing the Poncelet-Steiner theorem may indeed be weakened, but only with respect to the completeness of the circular arc, and not, per the Steiner theorem, with respect to the center. In two other alternatives, the centre may be omitted entirely provided that given are either two concentric circles, or two distinct intersecting circles, of which there are two cases: two intersection points and one intersection point (tangential circles). From any of these scenarios, centres can be constructed, reducing the scenario to the original hypothesis. Still other variations exist. It suffices to have two non-intersecting circles (without their centres), provided that at least one point is given on either the centerline through them or on the radical axis of the two circles, or alternatively to have three non-intersecting circles.[5] Once a single center is constructed, the scenario again reduces to the original hypothesis of the Poncelet-Steiner theorem. Extended, liberated, or neusis,