Area of functional analysis and convex analysis
In mathematics, Choquet theory, named after Gustave Choquet, is an area of functional analysis and convex analysis concerned with measures which have support on the extreme points of a convex set C. Roughly speaking, every vector of C should appear as a weighted average of extreme points, a concept made more precise by generalizing the notion of weighted average from a convex combination to an integral taken over the set E of extreme points. Here C is a subset of a real vector space V, and the main thrust of the theory is to treat the cases where V is an infinite-dimensional (locally convex Hausdorff) topological vector space along lines similar to the finite-dimensional case. The main concerns of Gustave Choquet were in potential theory. Choquet theory has become a general paradigm, particularly for treating convex cones as determined by their extreme rays, and so for many different notions of positivity in mathematics.
The two ends of a line segment determine the points in between: in vector terms the segment from v to w consists of the λv + (1 − λ)w with 0 ≤ λ ≤ 1. The classical result of Hermann Minkowski says that in Euclidean space, a bounded, closed convex set C is the convex hull of its extreme point set E, so that any c in C is a (finite) convex combination of points e of E. Here E may be a finite or an infinite set. In vector terms, by assigning non-negative weights w(e) to the e in E, almost all 0, we can represent any c in C as
c=∑e∈Ew(e)e=∑_ew(e)e}
with
∑e∈Ew(e)=1.∑_ew(e)=1.}
In any case the w(e) give a probability measure supported on a finite subset of E. For any affine function f on C, its value at the point c is
f(c)=∫f(e)dw(e).(c)=(e)dw(e).
In the infinite dimensional setting, one would like to make a similar statement.


Choquet's theorem[edit]
Choquet's theorem states that for a compact convex subset C of a normed space V, given c in C there exists a probability measure w supported on the set E of extreme points of C such that, for any affine function f on C, f(c)=∫f(e)dw(e).(c)=(e)dw(e).
In practice V will be a Banach space. The original Krein–Milman theorem follows from Choquet's result. Another corollary is the Riesz representation theorem for states on the continuous functions on a metrizable compact Hausdorff space.
More generally, for V a locally convex topological vector space, the Choquet–Bishop–de Leeuw theorem[1] gives the same formal statement.
In addition to the existence of a probability measure supported on the extreme boundary that represents a given point c, one might also consider the uniqueness of such measures. It is easy to see that uniqueness does not hold even in the finite dimensional setting. One can take, for counterexamples, the convex set to be a cube or a ball in R3. Uniqueness does hold, however, when the convex set is a finite dimensional simplex. A finite dimensional simplex is a special case of a Choquet simplex. Any point in a Choquet simplex is represented by a unique probability measure on the extreme points.

See also[edit]
Carathéodory's theorem – Point in the convex hull of a set P in Rd, is the convex combination of d+1 points in P
Helly's theorem – Theorem about the intersections of d-dimensional convex sets
Krein–Milman theorem – On when a space equals the closed convex hull of its extreme points
List of convexity topics
Shapley–Folkman lemma – Sums of sets of vectors are nearly convex
Notes[edit]


^ Errett Bishop; Karl de Leeuw. "The representations of linear functionals by measures on sets of extreme points". Annales de l'Institut Fourier, 9 (1959), pp. 305–331.


References[edit]
Asimow, L.; Ellis, A. J. (1980). Convexity theory and its applications in functional analysis. London Mathematical Society Monographs. Vol. 16. London-New York: Academic Press, Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers]. pp. x+266. ISBN 0-12-065340-0. MR 0623459.
Bourgin, Richard D. (1983). Geometric aspects of convex sets with the Radon-Nikodým property. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Vol. 993. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. pp. xii+474. ISBN 3-540-12296-6. MR 0704815.
Phelps, Robert R. (2001). Lectures on Choquet's theorem. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Vol. 1757 (Second edition of 1966 ed.). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. pp. viii+124. ISBN 3-540-41834-2. MR 1835574.
"Choquet simplex", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS Press, 2001 [1994]
vteFunctional analysis (topics – glossary)Spaces
Banach
Besov
Fréchet
Hilbert
Hölder
Nuclear
Orlicz
Schwartz
Sobolev
Topological vector
Properties
Barrelled
Complete
Dual (Algebraic/Topological)
Locally convex
Reflexive
Separable
Theorems
Hahn–Banach
Riesz representation
Closed graph
Uniform boundedness principle
Kakutani fixed-point
Krein–Milman
Min–max
Gelfand–Naimark
Banach–Alaoglu
Operators
Adjoint
Bounded
Compact
Hilbert–Schmidt
Normal
Nuclear
Trace class
Transpose
Unbounded
Unitary
Algebras
Banach algebra
C*-algebra
Spectrum of a C*-algebra
Operator algebra
Group algebra of a locally compact group
Von Neumann algebra
Open problems
Invariant subspace problem
Mahler's conjecture
Applications
Hardy space
Spectral theory of ordinary differential equations
Heat kernel
Index theorem
Calculus of variations
Functional calculus
Integral operator
Jones polynomial
Topological quantum field theory
Noncommutative geometry
Riemann hypothesis
Distribution (or Generalized functions)
Advanced topics
Approximation property
Balanced set
Choquet theory
Weak topology
Banach–Mazur distance
Tomita–Takesaki theory

 Mathematics portal
 Category
Commons

vteConvex analysis and variational analysisBasic concepts
Convex combination
Convex function
Convex set
Topics (list)
Choquet theory
Convex geometry
Convex metric space
Convex optimization
Duality
Lagrange multiplier
Legendre transformation
Locally convex topological vector space
Simplex
Maps
Convex conjugate
Concave
(Closed
K-
Logarithmically
Proper
Pseudo-
Quasi-) Convex function
Invex function
Legendre transformation
Semi-continuity
Subderivative
Main results (list)
Carathéodory's theorem
Ekeland's variational principle
Fenchel–Moreau theorem
Fenchel-Young inequality
Jensen's inequality
Hermite–Hadamard inequality
Krein–Milman theorem
Mazur's lemma
Shapley–Folkman lemma
Robinson-Ursescu
Simons
Ursescu
Sets
Convex hull
(Orthogonally, Pseudo-) Convex set
Effective domain
Epigraph
Hypograph
John ellipsoid
Lens
Radial set/Algebraic interior
Zonotope
Series
Convex series related ((cs, lcs)-closed, (cs, bcs)-complete, (lower) ideally convex, (Hx), and (Hwx))
Duality
Dual system
Duality gap
Strong duality
Weak duality
Applications and related
Convexity in economics

vteAnalysis in topological vector spacesBasic concepts
Abstract Wiener space
Classical Wiener space
Bochner space
Convex series
Cylinder set measure
Infinite-dimensional vector function
Matrix calculus
Vector calculus
Derivatives
Differentiable vector–valued functions from Euclidean space
Differentiation in Fréchet spaces
Fréchet derivative
Total
Functional derivative
Gateaux derivative
Directional
Generalizations of the derivative
Hadamard derivative
Holomorphic
Quasi-derivative
Measurability
Besov measure
Cylinder set measure
Canonical Gaussian
Classical Wiener measure
Measure like set functions
infinite-dimensional Gaussian measure
Projection-valued
Vector
Bochner / Weakly / Strongly measurable function
Radonifying function
Integrals
Bochner
Direct integral
Dunford
Gelfand–Pettis/Weak
Regulated
Paley–Wiener
Results
Cameron–Martin theorem
Inverse function theorem
Nash–Moser theorem
Feldman–Hájek theorem
No infinite-dimensional Lebesgue measure
Sazonov's theorem
Structure theorem for Gaussian measures
Related
Crinkled arc
Covariance operator
Functional calculus
Borel functional calculus
Continuous functional calculus
Holomorphic functional calculus
Applications
Banach manifold (bundle)
Convenient vector space
Choquet theory
Fréchet manifold
Hilbert manifold




