Theorem
In mathematical logic, the compactness theorem states that a set of first-order sentences has a model if and only if every finite subset of it has a model. This theorem is an important tool in model theory, as it provides a useful (but generally not effective) method for constructing models of any set of sentences that is finitely consistent.
The compactness theorem for the propositional calculus is a consequence of Tychonoff's theorem (which says that the product of compact spaces is compact) applied to compact Stone spaces,[1] hence the theorem's name. Likewise, it is analogous to the finite intersection property characterization of compactness in topological spaces: a collection of closed sets in a compact space has a non-empty intersection if every finite subcollection has a non-empty intersection.
The compactness theorem is one of the two key properties, along with the downward Löwenheim–Skolem theorem, that is used in Lindström's theorem to characterize first-order logic. Although there are some generalizations of the compactness theorem to non-first-order logics, the compactness theorem itself does not hold in them, except for a very limited number of examples.[2]


History[edit]
Kurt Gödel proved the countable compactness theorem in 1930.  Anatoly Maltsev proved the uncountable case in 1936.[3][4]

Applications[edit]
The compactness theorem has many applications in model theory; a few typical results are sketched here.

Robinson's principle[edit]
The compactness theorem implies the following result, stated by Abraham Robinson in his 1949 dissertation. 
Robinson's principle:[5][6] If a first-order sentence holds in every field of characteristic zero, then there exists a constant p such that the sentence holds for every field of characteristic larger than p.. This can be seen as follows: suppose φφ is a sentence that holds in every field of characteristic zero. Then its negation ¬φ,¬φ, together with the field axioms and the infinite sequence of sentences 
1+1≠0,1+1+1≠0,…1+1≠0,  1+1+1≠0, …
is not satisfiable (because there is no field of characteristic 0 in which ¬φ¬φ holds, and the infinite sequence of sentences ensures any model would be a field of characteristic 0). Therefore, there is a finite subset A of these sentences that is not satisfiable. A must contain ¬φ¬φ because otherwise it would be satisfiable. Because adding more sentences to A does not change unsatisfiability, we can assume that A contains the field axioms and, for some k,, the first k sentences of the form 1+1+⋯+1≠0.1+1+⋯+1≠0. Let B contain all the sentences of A except ¬φ.¬φ. Then any field with a characteristic greater than k is a model of B,, and ¬φ¬φ together with B is not satisfiable. This means that φφ must hold in every model of B,, which means precisely that φφ holds in every field of characteristic greater than k.. This completes the proof. 
The Lefschetz principle, one of the first examples of a transfer principle, extends this result. A first-order sentence φφ in the language of rings is true in some (or equivalently, in every) algebraically closed field of characteristic 0 (such as the complex numbers for instance) if and only if there exist infinitely many primes p for which φφ is true in some algebraically closed field of characteristic p,, in which case φφ is true in all algebraically closed fields of sufficiently large non-0 characteristic p..[5] 
One consequence is the following special case of the Ax–Grothendieck theorem: all injective complex polynomials Cn→Cnℂ^n→ℂ^n are surjective[5] (indeed, it can even be shown that its inverse will also be a polynomial).[7] In fact, the surjectivity conclusion remains true for any injective polynomial Fn→Fn^n^n where F is a finite field or the algebraic closure of such a field.[7]

Upward Löwenheim–Skolem theorem[edit]
A second application of the compactness theorem shows that any theory that has arbitrarily large finite models, or a single infinite model, has models of arbitrary large cardinality (this is the Upward Löwenheim–Skolem theorem). So for instance, there are nonstandard models of Peano arithmetic with uncountably many 'natural numbers'.  To achieve this, let T be the initial theory and let κκ be any cardinal number. Add to the language of T one constant symbol for every element of κ.κ. Then add to T a collection of sentences that say that the objects denoted by any two distinct constant symbols from the new collection are distinct (this is a collection of κ2κ^2 sentences). Since every finite subset of this new theory is satisfiable by a sufficiently large finite model of T,, or by any infinite model, the entire extended theory is satisfiable. But any model of the extended theory has cardinality at least κκ.

Non-standard analysis[edit]
A third application of the compactness theorem is the construction of nonstandard models of the real numbers, that is, consistent extensions of the theory of the real numbers that contain "infinitesimal" numbers.  To see this, let ΣΣ be a first-order axiomatization of the theory of the real numbers.  Consider the theory obtained by adding a new constant symbol εε to the language and adjoining to ΣΣ the axiom ε>0ε>0 and the axioms ε<1nε<1n for all positive integers n..  Clearly, the standard real numbers Rℝ are a model for every finite subset of these axioms, because the real numbers satisfy everything in ΣΣ and, by suitable choice of ε,ε, can be made to satisfy any finite subset of the axioms about ε.ε.  By the compactness theorem, there is a model ∗R^*ℝ that satisfies ΣΣ and also contains an infinitesimal element ε.ε.
A similar argument, this time adjoining the axioms ω>0,ω>1,…,ω>0, ω>1,…, etc., shows that the existence of numbers with infinitely large magnitudes cannot be ruled out by any axiomatization ΣΣ of the reals.[8]
It can be shown that the hyperreal numbers ∗R^*ℝ satisfy the transfer principle:[9] a first-order sentence is true of Rℝ if and only if it is true of ∗R.^*ℝ.

Proofs[edit]
One can prove the compactness theorem using Gödel's completeness theorem, which establishes that a set of sentences is satisfiable if and only if no contradiction can be proven from it.  Since proofs are always finite and therefore involve only finitely many of the given sentences, the compactness theorem follows.  In fact, the compactness theorem is equivalent to Gödel's completeness theorem, and both are equivalent to the Boolean prime ideal theorem, a weak form of the axiom of choice.[10]
Gödel originally proved the compactness theorem in just this way, but later some "purely semantic" proofs of the compactness theorem were found; that is, proofs that refer to truth but not to provability.  One of those proofs relies on ultraproducts hinging on the axiom of choice as follows:
Proof: 
Fix a first-order language L,, and let ΣΣ  be a collection of L-sentences such that every finite subcollection of L-sentences, i⊆Σ⊆Σ of it has a model Mi.ℳ_i.  Also let ∏i⊆ΣMi∏_i⊆Σℳ_i be the direct product of the structures and I be the collection of finite subsets of Σ.Σ. For each i∈I,, let Ai=j∈I:j⊇i._i={j:j}. 
The family of all of these sets Ai_i generates a proper filter, so there is an ultrafilter U containing all sets of the form Ai._i.
Now for any formula φφ in Σ:Σ:

the set Aφ_{φ} is in U
whenever j∈Aφ,_{φ}, then φ∈j,φ, hence φφ holds in Mjℳ_j
the set of all j with the property that φφ holds in  Mjℳ_j is a superset of Aφ,_{φ}, hence also in U
Łoś's theorem now implies that φφ holds in the ultraproduct ∏i⊆ΣMi/U.∏_i⊆Σℳ_i/U.  So this ultraproduct satisfies all formulas in Σ.Σ.

See also[edit]
Barwise compactness theorem
Herbrand's theorem – reduction of first-order mathematical logic to propositional logicPages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback
List of Boolean algebra topics
Löwenheim–Skolem theorem – Existence and cardinality of models of logical theories
Notes[edit]


^ See Truss (1997).

^ J. Barwise, S. Feferman, eds., Model-Theoretic Logics (New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985) [1], in particular, Makowsky, J. A. Chapter XVIII: Compactness, Embeddings and Definability. 645--716, see Theorems 4.5.9, 4.6.12 and Proposition 4.6.9. For compact logics for an extended notion of model see Ziegler, M. Chapter XV: Topological Model Theory. 557--577. For logics without the relativization property it is possible to have simultaneously compactness and interpolation, while the problem is still open for logics with relativization. See Xavier Caicedo, A Simple Solution to Friedman's Fourth Problem, J. Symbolic Logic, Volume 51, Issue 3 (1986), 778-784.doi:10.2307/2274031 JSTOR 2274031

^ Vaught, Robert L.: "Alfred Tarski's work in model theory". Journal of Symbolic Logic 51 (1986), no. 4, 869–882

^ Robinson, A.: Non-standard analysis. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam 1966. page 48.

^ a b c Marker 2002, pp. 40–43.

^ Gowers, Barrow-Green & Leader 2008, pp. 639–643.

^ a b Terence, Tao (7 March 2009). "Infinite fields, finite fields, and the Ax-Grothendieck theorem".

^ Goldblatt 1998, pp. 10–11.

^ Goldblatt 1998, p. 11.

^ See Hodges (1993).


References[edit]
Boolos, George; Jeffrey, Richard; Burgess, John (2004). Computability and Logic (fourth ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Chang, C.C.; Keisler, H. Jerome (1989). Model Theory (third ed.). Elsevier. ISBN 0-7204-0692-7.
Dawson, John W. junior (1993). "The compactness of first-order logic: From Gödel to Lindström". History and Philosophy of Logic. 14: 15–37. doi:10.1080/01445349308837208.
Hodges, Wilfrid (1993). Model theory. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-30442-3.
Goldblatt, Robert (1998). Lectures on the Hyperreals. New York: Springer Verlag. ISBN 0-387-98464-X.
Gowers, Timothy; Barrow-Green, June; Leader, Imre (2008). The Princeton Companion to Mathematics. Princeton: Princeton University Press. pp. 635–646. ISBN 978-1-4008-3039-8. OCLC 659590835.
Marker, David (2002). Model Theory: An Introduction. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Vol. 217. Springer. ISBN 978-0-387-98760-6. OCLC 49326991.
Robinson, J. A. (1965). "A Machine-Oriented Logic Based on the Resolution Principle". Journal of the ACM. Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). 12 (1): 23–41. doi:10.1145/321250.321253. ISSN 0004-5411. S2CID 14389185.
Truss, John K. (1997). Foundations of Mathematical Analysis. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-853375-6.
External links[edit]
Compactness Theorem, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
vteMathematical logicGeneral
Axiom
list
Cardinality
First-order logic
Formal proof
Formal semantics
Foundations of mathematics
Information theory
Lemma
Logical consequence
Model
Theorem
Theory
Type theory
Theorems (list) & Paradoxes
Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems
Tarski's undefinability
Banach–Tarski paradox
Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument
Compactness
Halting problem
Lindström's
Löwenheim–Skolem
Russell's paradox
LogicsTraditional
Classical logic
Logical truth
Tautology
Proposition
Inference
Logical equivalence
Consistency
Equiconsistency
Argument
Soundness
Validity
Syllogism
Square of opposition
Venn diagram
Propositional
Boolean algebra
Boolean functions
Logical connectives
Propositional calculus
Propositional formula
Truth tables
Many-valued logic
3
Finite
∞
Predicate
First-order
list
Second-order
Monadic
Higher-order
Free
Quantifiers
Predicate
Monadic predicate calculus
Set theory
Set
Hereditary
Class
(Ur-)Element
Ordinal number
Extensionality
Forcing
Relation
Equivalence
Partition
Set operations:
Intersection
Union
Complement
Cartesian product
Power set
Identities
Types of Sets
Countable
Uncountable
Empty
Inhabited
Singleton
Finite
Infinite
Transitive
Ultrafilter
Recursive
Fuzzy
Universal
Universe
Constructible
Grothendieck
Von Neumann
Maps & Cardinality
Function/Map
Domain
Codomain
Image
In/Sur/Bi-jection
Schröder–Bernstein theorem
Isomorphism
Gödel numbering
Enumeration
Large cardinal
Inaccessible
Aleph number
Operation
Binary
Set theories
Zermelo–Fraenkel
Axiom of choice
Continuum hypothesis
General
Kripke–Platek
Morse–Kelley
Naive
New Foundations
Tarski–Grothendieck
Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel
Ackermann
Constructive
Formal systems (list),Language & Syntax
Alphabet
Arity
Automata
Axiom schema
Expression
Ground
Extension
by definition
Conservative
Relation
Formation rule
Grammar
Formula
Atomic
Closed
Ground
Open
Free/bound variable
Language
Metalanguage
Logical connective
¬
∨
∧
→
↔
=
Predicate
Functional
Variable
Propositional variable
Proof
Quantifier
∃
!
∀
rank
Sentence
Atomic
Spectrum
Signature
String
Substitution
Symbol
Function
Logical/Constant
Non-logical
Variable
Term
Theory
list
Example axiomaticsystems (list)
of arithmetic:
Peano
second-order
elementary function
primitive recursive
Robinson
Skolem
of the real numbers
Tarski's axiomatization
of Boolean algebras
canonical
minimal axioms
of geometry:
Euclidean:
Elements
Hilbert's
Tarski's
non-Euclidean
Principia Mathematica
Proof theory
Formal proof
Natural deduction
Logical consequence
Rule of inference
Sequent calculus
Theorem
Systems
Axiomatic
Deductive
Hilbert
list
Complete theory
Independence (from ZFC)
Proof of impossibility
Ordinal analysis
Reverse mathematics
Self-verifying theories
Model theory
Interpretation
Function
of models
Model
Equivalence
Finite
Saturated
Spectrum
Submodel
Non-standard model
of arithmetic
Diagram
Elementary
Categorical theory
Model complete theory
Satisfiability
Semantics of logic
Strength
Theories of truth
Semantic
Tarski's
Kripke's
T-schema
Transfer principle
Truth predicate
Truth value
Type
Ultraproduct
Validity
Computability theory
Church encoding
Church–Turing thesis
Computably enumerable
Computable function
Computable set
Decision problem
Decidable
Undecidable
P
NP
P versus NP problem
Kolmogorov complexity
Lambda calculus
Primitive recursive function
Recursion
Recursive set
Turing machine
Type theory
Related
Abstract logic
Category theory
Concrete/Abstract Category
Category of sets
History of logic
History of mathematical logic
timeline
Logicism
Mathematical object
Philosophy of mathematics
Supertask
 Mathematics portal



