Gives a lower bound on the number of lines determined by n points in a projective plane
This article is about the number of lines determined by a finite set of points. For coloring infinite graphs, see De Bruijn–Erdős theorem (graph theory).
In incidence geometry, the De Bruijn–Erdős theorem, originally published by Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn and Paul Erdős (1948), states a lower bound on the number of lines determined by n points in a projective plane. By duality, this is also a bound on the number of intersection points determined by a configuration of lines.
Although the proof given by De Bruijn and Erdős is combinatorial, De Bruijn and Erdős noted in their paper that the analogous (Euclidean) result is a consequence of the  Sylvester–Gallai theorem, by an induction on the number of points.


Statement of the theorem[edit]
A near-pencil on seven points
Let P be a configuration of n points in a projective plane, not all on a line. Let t be the number of lines determined by P. Then,

t ≥ n, and
if t = n, any two lines have exactly one point of P in common. In this case, P is either a projective plane or P is a near pencil, meaning that exactly n - 1 of the points are collinear.
Euclidean proof[edit]
The theorem is clearly true for three non-collinear points. We proceed by induction.
Assume n > 3 and the theorem is true for n − 1.
Let P be a set of n points not all collinear.
The Sylvester–Gallai theorem states that there is a line containing exactly two points of P. Such two point lines are called ordinary lines.
Let a and b be the two points of P on an ordinary line.
If the removal of point a produces a set of collinear points then P generates a near pencil of n lines (the n - 1 ordinary lines through a plus the one line containing the other n - 1 points).
Otherwise, the removal of a produces a set, P' , of n − 1 points that are not all collinear.
By the induction hypothesis, P'  determines at least n − 1 lines. The ordinary line determined by a and b is not among these, so P determines at least n lines.

J. H. Conway's proof[edit]
John Horton Conway has a purely combinatorial proof which consequently also holds for points and lines over the complex numbers, quaternions and octonions.[1]

References[edit]


^ Stasys Jukna, Extremal Combinatorics, Second edition, Springer Verlag, 2011, pages 167 - 168.


Sources[edit]
De Bruijn, N. G.; Erdős, P. (1948), "On a combinatioral [sic] problem" (PDF), Indagationes Mathematicae, 10: 421–423.
Batten, Lynn Margaret (1997), "2.2 The De Bruijn–Erdős theorem", Combinatorics of Finite Geometries (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp. 25–27, ISBN 0-521-59014-0
vteIncidence structuresRepresentation
Incidence matrix
Incidence graph
Fields
Combinatorics
Block design
Steiner system
Geometry
Incidence
Projective plane
Graph theory
Hypergraph
Statistics
Blocking
Configurations
Complete quadrangle
Fano plane
Möbius–Kantor configuration
Pappus configuration
Hesse configuration
Desargues configuration
Reye configuration
Schläfli double six
Cremona–Richmond configuration
Kummer configuration
Grünbaum–Rigby configuration
Klein configuration
Dual
Theorems
Sylvester–Gallai theorem
De Bruijn–Erdős theorem
Szemerédi–Trotter theorem
Beck's theorem
Bruck–Ryser–Chowla theorem
Applications
Design of experiments
Kirkman's schoolgirl problem




