In functional analysis, a branch of mathematics, the Hellinger–Toeplitz theorem states that an everywhere-defined symmetric operator on a Hilbert space with inner product ⟨⋅|⋅⟩⟨·|·⟩ is bounded. By definition, an operator A is symmetric if 

⟨Ax|y⟩=⟨x|Ay⟩|y⟩=|Ay⟩
for all x, y in the domain of A.  Note that symmetric everywhere-defined operators are necessarily self-adjoint, so this theorem can also be stated as follows: an everywhere-defined self-adjoint operator is bounded. The theorem is named after Ernst David Hellinger and Otto Toeplitz. 
This theorem can be viewed as an immediate corollary of the closed graph theorem, as self-adjoint operators are closed. Alternatively, it can be argued using the uniform boundedness principle. One relies on the symmetric assumption, therefore the inner product structure, in proving the theorem. Also crucial is the fact that the given operator A is defined everywhere (and, in turn, the completeness of Hilbert spaces).
The Hellinger–Toeplitz theorem reveals certain technical difficulties in the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. Observables in quantum mechanics correspond to self-adjoint operators on some Hilbert space, but some observables (like energy) are unbounded. By Hellinger–Toeplitz, such operators cannot be everywhere defined (but they may be defined on a dense subset). Take for instance the quantum harmonic oscillator. Here the Hilbert space is L2(R), the space of square integrable functions on R, and the energy operator H is defined by (assuming the units are chosen such that ℏ = m = ω = 1)

[Hf](x)=−12d2dx2f(x)+12x2f(x).[Hf](x)=-1/2d^2/dx^2f(x)+1/2x^2f(x).
This operator is self-adjoint and unbounded (its eigenvalues are 1/2, 3/2, 5/2, ...), so it cannot be defined on the whole of L2(R).

References[edit]
Reed, Michael and Simon, Barry: Methods of Mathematical Physics, Volume 1: Functional Analysis.  Academic Press, 1980.  See Section III.5.
Teschl, Gerald (2009). Mathematical Methods in Quantum Mechanics; With Applications to Schrödinger Operators. Providence: American Mathematical Society. ISBN 978-0-8218-4660-5.
vteFunctional analysis (topics – glossary)Spaces
Banach
Besov
Fréchet
Hilbert
Hölder
Nuclear
Orlicz
Schwartz
Sobolev
Topological vector
Properties
Barrelled
Complete
Dual (Algebraic/Topological)
Locally convex
Reflexive
Separable
Theorems
Hahn–Banach
Riesz representation
Closed graph
Uniform boundedness principle
Kakutani fixed-point
Krein–Milman
Min–max
Gelfand–Naimark
Banach–Alaoglu
Operators
Adjoint
Bounded
Compact
Hilbert–Schmidt
Normal
Nuclear
Trace class
Transpose
Unbounded
Unitary
Algebras
Banach algebra
C*-algebra
Spectrum of a C*-algebra
Operator algebra
Group algebra of a locally compact group
Von Neumann algebra
Open problems
Invariant subspace problem
Mahler's conjecture
Applications
Hardy space
Spectral theory of ordinary differential equations
Heat kernel
Index theorem
Calculus of variations
Functional calculus
Integral operator
Jones polynomial
Topological quantum field theory
Noncommutative geometry
Riemann hypothesis
Distribution (or Generalized functions)
Advanced topics
Approximation property
Balanced set
Choquet theory
Weak topology
Banach–Mazur distance
Tomita–Takesaki theory

 Mathematics portal
 Category
Commons




