In functional analysis, the Hille–Yosida theorem characterizes the generators of strongly continuous one-parameter semigroups of linear operators on Banach spaces. It is sometimes stated for the special case of contraction semigroups, with the general case being called the Feller–Miyadera–Phillips theorem (after William Feller, Isao Miyadera, and Ralph Phillips). The contraction semigroup case is widely used in the theory of Markov processes. In other scenarios, the closely related Lumer–Phillips theorem is often more useful in determining whether a given operator generates a strongly continuous contraction semigroup. The theorem is named after the mathematicians Einar Hille and Kōsaku Yosida who independently discovered the result around 1948.


Formal definitions[edit]
Main article: C0-semigroup
If X is a Banach space, a one-parameter semigroup of operators on X is a family of operators indexed on the non-negative real numbers
{T(t)} t ∈ [0, ∞) such that 

T(0)=I(0)=I  
T(s+t)=T(s)∘T(t),∀t,s≥0.(s+t)=T(s)(t),  ,s≥0.
The semigroup is said to be strongly continuous, also called a (C0) semigroup, if and only if the mapping

t↦T(t)x(t)x
is continuous for all x ∈ X, where [0, ∞) has the usual topology and X has the norm topology.
The infinitesimal generator of a one-parameter semigroup T is an operator A defined on a possibly proper subspace of X as follows:

The domain of A is the set of x ∈ X such that
h−1(T(h)x−x)^-1(T(h)x-x)
has a limit as h approaches 0 from the right.
The value of Ax is the value of the above limit. In other words, Ax is the right-derivative at 0 of the function
t↦T(t)x.(t)x.
The infinitesimal generator of a strongly continuous one-parameter semigroup is a closed linear operator defined on a dense linear subspace of X.
The Hille–Yosida theorem provides a necessary and sufficient condition for a closed linear operator A on a Banach space to be the infinitesimal generator of a strongly continuous one-parameter semigroup.

Statement of the theorem[edit]
Let A be a linear operator defined on a linear subspace D(A) of the Banach space X, ω a real number, and M > 0. Then A generates a strongly continuous semigroup T that satisfies ‖T(t)‖≤MeωtT(t)e^ if and only if[1]

A is closed and D(A) is dense in X,
every real λ > ω belongs to the resolvent set of A and for such λ and for all positive integers n,
‖(λI−A)−n‖≤M(λ−ω)n.(-A)^-n≤M/(λ-ω)^n.
Hille-Yosida theorem for contraction semigroups[edit]
In the general case the Hille–Yosida theorem is mainly of theoretical importance since the estimates on the powers of the resolvent operator that appear in the statement of the theorem can usually not be checked in concrete examples. In the special case of contraction semigroups (M = 1 and ω = 0 in the above theorem) only the case n = 1 has to be checked and the theorem also becomes of some practical importance. The explicit statement of the Hille–Yosida theorem for contraction semigroups is:
Let A be a linear operator defined on a linear subspace D(A) of the Banach space X. Then A generates a contraction semigroup if and only if[2]

A is closed and D(A) is dense in X,
every real λ > 0 belongs to the resolvent set of A and for such λ,
‖(λI−A)−1‖≤1λ.(-A)^-1≤1/λ.
See also[edit]
C0 semigroup
Lumer–Phillips theorem
Stone's theorem on one-parameter unitary groups
Notes[edit]


^ Engel and Nagel Theorem II.3.8, Arendt et al. Theorem 3.3.4, Staffans Theorem 3.4.1

^ Engel and Nagel Theorem II.3.5, Arendt et al. Corollary 3.3.5, Staffans Corollary 3.4.5


References[edit]
Riesz, F.; Sz.-Nagy, B. (1995), Functional analysis. Reprint of the 1955 original, Dover Books on Advanced Mathematics, Dover, ISBN 0-486-66289-6
Reed, Michael; Simon, Barry (1975), Methods of modern mathematical physics. II. Fourier analysis, self-adjointness., Academic Press, ISBN 0-12-585050-6
Engel, Klaus-Jochen; Nagel, Rainer (2000), One-parameter semigroups for linear evolution equations, Springer, ISBN 0-387-98463-1
Arendt, Wolfgang; Batty, Charles; Hieber, Matthias; Neubrander, Frank (2001), Vector-valued Laplace Transforms and Cauchy Problems, Birkhauser, ISBN 0-8176-6549-8
Staffans, Olof (2005), Well-posed linear systems, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-82584-9
Feller, William (1971), An introduction to probability theory and its applications, vol. II (Second ed.), New York: John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 0-471-25709-5
Vrabie, Ioan I. (2003), C0-semigroups and applications, North-Holland Mathematics Studies, vol. 191, Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing, ISBN 0-444-51288-8
vteFunctional analysis (topics – glossary)Spaces
Banach
Besov
Fréchet
Hilbert
Hölder
Nuclear
Orlicz
Schwartz
Sobolev
Topological vector
Properties
Barrelled
Complete
Dual (Algebraic/Topological)
Locally convex
Reflexive
Separable
Theorems
Hahn–Banach
Riesz representation
Closed graph
Uniform boundedness principle
Kakutani fixed-point
Krein–Milman
Min–max
Gelfand–Naimark
Banach–Alaoglu
Operators
Adjoint
Bounded
Compact
Hilbert–Schmidt
Normal
Nuclear
Trace class
Transpose
Unbounded
Unitary
Algebras
Banach algebra
C*-algebra
Spectrum of a C*-algebra
Operator algebra
Group algebra of a locally compact group
Von Neumann algebra
Open problems
Invariant subspace problem
Mahler's conjecture
Applications
Hardy space
Spectral theory of ordinary differential equations
Heat kernel
Index theorem
Calculus of variations
Functional calculus
Integral operator
Jones polynomial
Topological quantum field theory
Noncommutative geometry
Riemann hypothesis
Distribution (or Generalized functions)
Advanced topics
Approximation property
Balanced set
Choquet theory
Weak topology
Banach–Mazur distance
Tomita–Takesaki theory

 Mathematics portal
 Category
Commons




