The group of K-rational points of an abelian variety is a finitely-generated abelian group
Mordell–Weil theoremFieldNumber theoryConjectured byHenri PoincaréConjectured in1901First proof byAndré WeilFirst proof in1929GeneralizationsFaltings's theoremBombieri–Lang conjectureMordell–Lang conjecture
In mathematics, the Mordell–Weil theorem states that for an abelian variety A over a number field K, the group A(K)(K) of K-rational points of A is a finitely-generated abelian group, called the Mordell–Weil group. The case with A an elliptic curve E and K the field of rational numbers is Mordell's theorem, answering a question apparently posed by Henri Poincaré around 1901; it was proved by Louis Mordell in 1922. It is a foundational theorem of Diophantine geometry and the arithmetic of abelian varieties.


History[edit]
The tangent-chord process (one form of addition theorem on a cubic curve) had been known as far back as the seventeenth century. The process of infinite descent of Fermat was well known, but Mordell succeeded in establishing the finiteness of the quotient group E(Q)/2E(Q)(ℚ)/2E(ℚ) which forms a major step in the proof. Certainly the finiteness of this group is a necessary condition for E(Q)(ℚ) to be finitely generated; and it shows that the rank is finite. This turns out to be the essential difficulty. It can be proved by direct analysis of the doubling of a point on E.
Some years later André Weil took up the subject, producing the generalisation to Jacobians of higher genus curves over arbitrary number fields in his doctoral dissertation[1] published in 1928. More abstract methods were required, to carry out a proof with the same basic structure. The second half of the proof needs some type of height function, in terms of which to bound the 'size' of points of A(K)(K). Some measure of the co-ordinates will do; heights are logarithmic, so that (roughly speaking) it is a question of how many digits are required to write down a set of homogeneous coordinates. For an abelian variety, there is no a priori preferred representation, though, as a projective variety.
Both halves of the proof have been improved significantly by subsequent technical advances: in Galois cohomology as applied to descent, and in the study of the best height functions (which are quadratic forms).

Further results[edit]
The theorem leaves a number of questions still unanswered:

Calculation of the rank. This is still a demanding computational problem, and does not always have effective solutions.
Meaning of the rank: see Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture.
Possible torsion subgroups: Barry Mazur proved in 1978 that the Mordell–Weil group can have only finitely many torsion subgroups. This is the elliptic curve case of the torsion conjecture.
For a curve C in its Jacobian variety as A, can the intersection of C with A(K)(K) be infinite? Because of Faltings's theorem, this is false unless C=A=A.
In the same context, can C contain infinitely many torsion points of A? Because of the Manin–Mumford conjecture, proved by Michel Raynaud, this is false unless it is the elliptic curve case.
See also[edit]
Arithmetic geometry
Mordell–Weil group
References[edit]


^ Weil, André (1928). L'arithmétique sur les courbes algébriques (PhD). Almqvist & Wiksells Boktryckeri AB, Uppsala. Archived from the original on 2014-12-22.


Weil, André (1929). "L'arithmétique sur les courbes algébriques". Acta Mathematica. Vol. 52, no. 1. pp. 281–315. doi:10.1007/BF02592688. MR 1555278.
Mordell, Louis Joel (1922). "On the rational solutions of the indeterminate equations of the third and fourth degrees". Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. Vol. 21. pp. 179–192.
Joseph H., Silverman (1986). The Arithmetic of Elliptic Curves. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Vol. 106. Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-09494-6. ISBN 0-387-96203-4. MR 2514094.
vteTopics in algebraic curvesRational curves
Five points determine a conic
Projective line
Rational normal curve
Riemann sphere
Twisted cubic
Elliptic curvesAnalytic theory
Elliptic function
Elliptic integral
Fundamental pair of periods
Modular form
Arithmetic theory
Counting points on elliptic curves
Division polynomials
Hasse's theorem on elliptic curves
Mazur's torsion theorem
Modular elliptic curve
Modularity theorem
Mordell–Weil theorem
Nagell–Lutz theorem
Supersingular elliptic curve
Schoof's algorithm
Schoof–Elkies–Atkin algorithm
Applications
Elliptic curve cryptography
Elliptic curve primality
Higher genus
De Franchis theorem
Faltings's theorem
Hurwitz's automorphisms theorem
Hurwitz surface
Hyperelliptic curve
Plane curves
AF+BG theorem
Bézout's theorem
Bitangent
Cayley–Bacharach theorem
Conic section
Cramer's paradox
Cubic plane curve
Fermat curve
Genus–degree formula
Hilbert's sixteenth problem
Nagata's conjecture on curves
Plücker formula
Quartic plane curve
Real plane curve
Riemann surfaces
Belyi's theorem
Bring's curve
Bolza surface
Compact Riemann surface
Dessin d'enfant
Differential of the first kind
Klein quartic
Riemann's existence theorem
Riemann–Roch theorem
Teichmüller space
Torelli theorem
Constructions
Dual curve
Polar curve
Smooth completion
Structure of curvesDivisors on curves
Abel–Jacobi map
Brill–Noether theory
Clifford's theorem on special divisors
Gonality of an algebraic curve
Jacobian variety
Riemann–Roch theorem
Weierstrass point
Weil reciprocity law
Moduli
ELSV formula
Gromov–Witten invariant
Hodge bundle
Moduli of algebraic curves
Stable curve
Morphisms
Hasse–Witt matrix
Riemann–Hurwitz formula
Prym variety
Weber's theorem (Algebraic curves)
Singularities
Acnode
Crunode
Cusp
Delta invariant
Tacnode
Vector bundles
Birkhoff–Grothendieck theorem
Stable vector bundle
Vector bundles on algebraic curves




