Details: If seven of the points P1, ..., P8 lie on a conic, then the ninth point can be chosen on that conic, since C will always contain the whole conic on account of Bézout's theorem. In other cases, we have the following. If no seven points out of P1, ..., P8 are co-conic, then the vector space of cubic homogeneous polynomials that vanish on (the affine cones of) P1, ..., P8 (with multiplicity for double points) has dimension two. In that case, every cubic through P1, ..., P8 also passes through the intersection of any two different cubics through P1, ..., P8, which has at least nine points (over the algebraic closure) on account of Bézout's theorem. These points cannot be covered by P1, ..., P8 only, which gives us P9. Since degenerate conics are a union of at most two lines, there are always four out of seven points on a degenerate conic that are collinear. Consequently: If no seven points out of P1, ..., P8 lie on a non-degenerate conic, and no four points out of P1, ..., P8 lie on a line, then the vector space of cubic homogeneous polynomials that vanish on (the affine cones of) P1, ..., P8 has dimension two. On the other hand, assume P1, P2, P3, P4 are collinear and no seven points out of P1, ..., P8 are co-conic. Then no five points of P1, ..., P8 and no three points of P5, P6, P7, P8 are collinear. Since C will always contain the whole line through P1, P2, P3, P4 on account of Bézout's theorem, the vector space of cubic homogeneous polynomials that vanish on (the affine cones of) P1, ..., P8 is isomorphic to the vector space of quadratic homogeneous polynomials that vanish (the affine cones of) P5, P6, P7, P8, which has dimension two. Although the sets of conditions for both dimension two results are different, they are both strictly weaker than full general positions: three points are allowed to be collinear, and six points are allowed to lie on a conic (in general two points determine a line and five points determine a conic). For the Cayley–Bacharach theorem, it is necessary to have a family of cubics passing through the nine points, rather than a single one. According to Bézout's theorem, two different cubic curves over an algebraically closed field which have no common irreducible component meet in exactly nine points (counted with multiplicity). The Cayley–Bacharach theorem thus asserts that the last point of intersection of any two members in the family of curves does not move if eight intersection points (without seven co-conic ones) are already prescribed.