forms: See also: Harmonic differential If M is a compact Riemannian manifold, then each equivalence class in HdRk(M)_dR^k(M) contains exactly one harmonic form. That is, every member ωω of a given equivalence class of closed forms can be written as ω=α+γω=α+γ where αα is exact and γγ is harmonic: Δγ=0Δγ=0. Any harmonic function on a compact connected Riemannian manifold is a constant. Thus, this particular representative element can be understood to be an extremum (a minimum) of all cohomologously equivalent forms on the manifold. For example, on a 2-torus, one may envision a constant 1-form as one where all of the "hair" is combed neatly in the same direction (and all of the "hair" having the same length). In this case, there are two cohomologically distinct combings; all of the others are linear combinations. In particular, this implies that the 1st Betti number of a 2-torus is two. More generally, on an n-dimensional torus Tn^n, one can consider the various combings of k-forms on the torus. There are n choose k such combings that can be used to form the basis vectors for HdRk(Tn)_dR^k(T^n); the k-th Betti number for the de Rham cohomology group for the n-torus is thus n choose k. More precisely, for a differential manifold M, one may equip it with some auxiliary Riemannian metric. Then the Laplacian ΔΔ is defined by Δ=dδ+δdΔ=dδ+ with d the exterior derivative and δδ the codifferential. The Laplacian is a homogeneous (in grading) linear differential operator acting upon the exterior algebra of differential forms: we can look at its action on each component of degree k separately. If M is compact and oriented, the dimension of the kernel of the Laplacian acting upon the space of k-forms is then equal (by Hodge theory) to that of the de Rham cohomology group in degree k: the Laplacian picks out a unique harmonic form in each cohomology class of closed forms. In particular, the space of all harmonic k-forms on M is isomorphic to Hk(M;R).^k(M;ℝ). The dimension of each such space is finite, and is given by the k-th Betti number. Hodge