Definitions: A real closed field is a field F in which any of the following equivalent conditions is true: F is elementarily equivalent to the real numbers. In other words, it has the same first-order properties as the reals: any sentence in the first-order language of fields is true in F if and only if it is true in the reals. There is a total order on F making it an ordered field such that, in this ordering, every positive element of F has a square root in F and any polynomial of odd degree with coefficients in F has at least one root in F. F is a formally real field such that every polynomial of odd degree with coefficients in F has at least one root in F, and for every element a of F there is b in F such that a = b2 or a = −b2. F is not algebraically closed, but its algebraic closure is a finite extension. F is not algebraically closed but the field extension F(−1)(√(-1) ) is algebraically closed. There is an ordering on F that does not extend to an ordering on any proper algebraic extension of F. F is a formally real field such that no proper algebraic extension of F is formally real. (In other words, the field is maximal in an algebraic closure with respect to the property of being formally real.) There is an ordering on F making it an ordered field such that, in this ordering, the intermediate value theorem holds for all polynomials over F with degree ≥ 0. F is a weakly o-minimal ordered field.[1] If F is an ordered field, the Artin–Schreier theorem states that F has an algebraic extension, called the real closure K of F, such that K is a real closed field whose ordering is an extension of the given ordering on F, and is unique up to a unique isomorphism of fields identical on F[2] (note that every ring homomorphism between real closed fields automatically is order preserving, because x ≤ y if and only if ∃z : y = x + z2). For example, the real closure of the ordered field of rational numbers is the field Ralgℝ_alg of real algebraic numbers. The theorem is named for Emil Artin and Otto Schreier, who proved it in 1926. If (F, P) is an ordered field, and E is a Galois extension of F, then by Zorn's lemma there is a maximal ordered field extension (M, Q) with M a subfield of E containing F and the order on M extending P. This M, together with its ordering Q, is called the relative real closure of (F, P) in E. We call (F, P) real closed relative to E if M is just F. When E is the algebraic closure of F the relative real closure of F in E is actually the real closure of F described earlier.[3] If F is a field (no ordering compatible with the field operations is assumed, nor is it assumed that F is orderable) then F still has a real closure, which may not be a field anymore, but just a real closed ring. For example, the real closure of the field Q(2)ℚ(√(2)) is the ring Ralg×Ralgℝ_alg×ℝ_alg (the two copies correspond to the two orderings of Q(2)ℚ(√(2))). On the other hand, if Q(2)ℚ(√(2)) is considered as an ordered subfield of Rℝ, its real closure is again the field Ralgℝ_alg. Decidability and quantifier