elimination: The language of real closed fields Lrcfℒ_rcf includes symbols for the operations of addition and multiplication, the constants 0 and 1, and the order relation ≤ (as well as equality, if this is not considered a logical symbol). In this language, the (first-order) theory of real closed fields, Trcf𝒯_rcf, consists of the following: the axioms of ordered fields; the axiom asserting that every positive number has a square root; for every odd number d, the axiom asserting that all polynomials of degree d have at least one root. All of the above axioms can be expressed in first-order logic (i.e. quantification ranges only over elements of the field). Tarski proved (c. 1931) that Trcf𝒯_rcf is complete, meaning that for any Lrcfℒ_rcf-sentence, it can be proven either true or false from the above axioms. Furthermore, Trcf𝒯_rcf is decidable, meaning that there is an algorithm to decide the truth or falsity of any such sentence.[citation needed] The Tarski–Seidenberg theorem extends this result to decidable quantifier elimination. That is, there is an algorithm that, given any Lrcfℒ_rcf-formula, which may contain free variables, produces an equivalent quantifier-free formula in the same free variables, where equivalent means that the two formulas are true for exactly the same values of the variables. The Tarski–Seidenberg theorem is an extension of the decidability theorem, as it can be easily checked whether a quantifier-free formula without free variables is true or false. This theorem can be further extended to the following projection theorem. If R is a real closed field, a formula with n free variables defines a subset of Rn, the set of the points that satisfy the formula. Such a subset is called a semialgebraic set. Given a subset of k variables, the projection from Rn to Rk is the function that maps every n-tuple to the k-tuple of the components corresponding to the subset of variables. The projection theorem asserts that a projection of a semialgebraic set is a semialgebraic set, and that there is an algorithm that, given a quantifier-free formula defining a semialgebraic set, produces a quantifier-free formula for its projection. In fact, the projection theorem is equivalent to quantifier elimination, as the projection of a semialgebraic set defined by the formula p(x, y) is defined by (∃x)P(x,y),()P(x,y), where x and y represent respectively the set of eliminated variables, and the set of kept variables. The decidability of a first-order theory of the real numbers depends dramatically on the primitive operations and functions that are considered (here addition and multiplication). Adding other functions symbols, for example, the sine or the exponential function, can provide undecidable theories; see Richardson's theorem and Decidability of first-order theories of the real numbers. Complexity of deciding