theory: In the light of later work on Galois theory, the principles of these proofs have been clarified. It is straightforward to show from analytic geometry that constructible lengths must come from base lengths by the solution of some sequence of quadratic equations.[4] In terms of field theory, such lengths must be contained in a field extension generated by a tower of quadratic extensions. It follows that a field generated by constructions will always have degree over the base field that is a power of two. In the specific case of a regular n-gon, the question reduces to the question of constructing a length cos 2π/n , which is a trigonometric number and hence an algebraic number. This number lies in the n-th cyclotomic field — and in fact in its real subfield, which is a totally real field and a rational vector space of dimension ½ φ(n), where φ(n) is Euler's totient function. Wantzel's result comes down to a calculation showing that φ(n) is a power of 2 precisely in the cases specified. As for the construction of Gauss, when the Galois group is a 2-group it follows that it has a sequence of subgroups of orders 1, 2, 4, 8, ... that are nested, each in the next (a composition series, in group theory terminology), something simple to prove by induction in this case of an abelian group. Therefore, there are subfields nested inside the cyclotomic field, each of degree 2 over the one before. Generators for each such field can be written down by Gaussian period theory. For example, for n = 17 there is a period that is a sum of eight roots of unity, one that is a sum of four roots of unity, and one that is the sum of two, which is cos 2π/17 . Each of those is a root of a quadratic equation in terms of the one before. Moreover, these equations have real rather than complex roots, so in principle can be solved by geometric construction: this is because the work all goes on inside a totally real field. In this way the result of Gauss can be understood in current terms; for actual calculation of the equations to be solved, the periods can be squared and compared with the 'lower' periods, in a quite feasible algorithm. Compass and straightedge