Introduction: Sampling is a process of converting a signal (for example, a function of continuous time or space) into a sequence of values (a function of discrete time or space). Shannon's version of the theorem states:[2] Theorem — If a function x(t)(t) contains no frequencies higher than B hertz, then it can be completely determined from its ordinates at a sequence of points spaced less than 1/(2B)1/(2B) seconds apart. A sufficient sample-rate is therefore anything larger than 2B2B samples per second. Equivalently, for a given sample rate fs_s, perfect reconstruction is guaranteed possible for a bandlimit B<fs/2<f_s/2. When the bandlimit is too high (or there is no bandlimit), the reconstruction exhibits imperfections known as aliasing. Modern statements of the theorem are sometimes careful to explicitly state that x(t)(t) must contain no sinusoidal component at exactly frequency B,, or that B must be strictly less than ½ the sample rate. The threshold 2B2B is called the Nyquist rate and is an attribute of the continuous-time input x(t)(t) to be sampled. The sample rate must exceed the Nyquist rate for the samples to suffice to represent x(t).(t). The threshold fs/2_s/2 is called the Nyquist frequency and is an attribute of the sampling equipment. All meaningful frequency components of the properly sampled x(t)(t) exist below the Nyquist frequency. The condition described by these inequalities is called the Nyquist criterion, or sometimes the Raabe condition. The theorem is also applicable to functions of other domains, such as space, in the case of a digitized image. The only change, in the case of other domains, is the units of measure attributed to t,, fs,_s, and B.. The normalized sinc function: sin(πx) / (πx) ... showing the central peak at x = 0, and zero-crossings at the other integer values of x. The symbol T≜1/fs≜1/f_s is customarily used to represent the interval between samples and is called the sample period or sampling interval. The samples of function x(t)(t) are commonly denoted by x[n]≜x(nT)[n](nT) (alternatively xn_n in older signal processing literature), for all integer values of n.. Another convenient definition is x[n]≜T⋅x(nT),[n](nT), which preserves the energy of the signal as T varies.[3] A mathematically ideal way to interpolate the sequence involves the use of sinc functions. Each sample in the sequence is replaced by a sinc function, centered on the time axis at the original location of the sample nT,, with the amplitude of the sinc function scaled to the sample value, x[n].[n]. Subsequently, the sinc functions are summed into a continuous function. A mathematically equivalent method uses the Dirac comb and proceeds by convolving one sinc function with a series of Dirac delta pulses, weighted by the sample values. Neither method is numerically practical. Instead, some type of approximation of the sinc functions, finite in length, is used. The imperfections attributable to the approximation are known as interpolation error. Practical digital-to-analog converters produce neither scaled and delayed sinc functions, nor ideal Dirac pulses. Instead they produce a piecewise-constant sequence of scaled and delayed rectangular pulses (the zero-order hold), usually followed by a lowpass filter (called an "anti-imaging filter") to remove spurious high-frequency replicas (images) of the original baseband signal.