characterizations: Main article: Forbidden graph characterization A family F of graphs is said to be closed under the operation of taking minors if every minor of a graph in F also belongs to F. If F is a minor-closed family, then let S be the class of graphs that are not in F (the complement of F). According to the Robertson–Seymour theorem, there exists a finite set H of minimal elements in S. These minimal elements form a forbidden graph characterization of F: the graphs in F are exactly the graphs that do not have any graph in H as a minor.[9] The members of H are called the excluded minors (or forbidden minors, or minor-minimal obstructions) for the family F. For example, the planar graphs are closed under taking minors: contracting an edge in a planar graph, or removing edges or vertices from the graph, cannot destroy its planarity. Therefore, the planar graphs have a forbidden minor characterization, which in this case is given by Wagner's theorem: the set H of minor-minimal nonplanar graphs contains exactly two graphs, the complete graph K5 and the complete bipartite graph K3,3, and the planar graphs are exactly the graphs that do not have a minor in the set {K5, K3,3}. The existence of forbidden minor characterizations for all minor-closed graph families is an equivalent way of stating the Robertson–Seymour theorem. For, suppose that every minor-closed family F has a finite set H of minimal forbidden minors, and let S be any infinite set of graphs. Define F from S as the family of graphs that do not have a minor in S. Then F is minor-closed and has a finite set H of minimal forbidden minors. Let C be the complement of F. S is a subset of C since S and F are disjoint, and H are the minimal graphs in C. Consider a graph G in H. G cannot have a proper minor in S since G is minimal in C. At the same time, G must have a minor in S, since otherwise G would be an element in F. Therefore, G is an element in S, i.e., H is a subset of S, and all other graphs in S have a minor among the graphs in H, so H is the finite set of minimal elements of S. For the other implication, assume that every set of graphs has a finite subset of minimal graphs and let a minor-closed set F be given. We want to find a set H of graphs such that a graph is in F if and only if it does not have a minor in H. Let E be the graphs which are not minors of any graph in F, and let H be the finite set of minimal graphs in E. Now, let an arbitrary graph G be given. Assume first that G is in F. G cannot have a minor in H since G is in F and H is a subset of E. Now assume that G is not in F. Then G is not a minor of any graph in F, since F is minor-closed. Therefore, G is in E, so G has a minor in H. Examples of minor-closed