theorems: Gödel's incompleteness theorems show that there are inherent limitations to what can be proven within any given first-order theory in mathematics. The "incompleteness" in their name refers to another meaning of complete (see model theory – Using the compactness and completeness theorems): A theory T is complete (or decidable) if every sentence S in the language of T is either provable (T⊢S) or disprovable (T⊢¬S⊢). The first incompleteness theorem states that any T which is consistent, effective and contains Robinson arithmetic ("Q") must be incomplete in this sense, by explicitly constructing a sentence ST_T which is demonstrably neither provable nor disprovable within T. The second incompleteness theorem extends this result by showing that ST_T can be chosen so that it expresses the consistency of T itself. Since ST_T cannot be proven in T, the completeness theorem implies the existence of a model of T in which ST_T is false. In fact, ST_T is a Π1 sentence, i.e. it states that some finitistic property is true of all natural numbers; so if it is false, then some natural number is a counterexample. If this counterexample existed within the standard natural numbers, its existence would disprove ST_T within T; but the incompleteness theorem showed this to be impossible, so the counterexample must not be a standard number, and thus any model of T in which ST_T is false must include non-standard numbers. In fact, the model of any theory containing Q obtained by the systematic construction of the arithmetical model existence theorem, is always non-standard with a non-equivalent provability predicate and a non-equivalent way to interpret its own construction, so that this construction is non-recursive (as recursive definitions would be unambiguous). Also, if T is at least slightly stronger than Q (e.g. if it includes induction for bounded existential formulas), then Tennenbaum's theorem shows that it has no recursive non-standard models. Relationship to the compactness