statement: In many applications, we are interested in finding a minimum feedback vertex set in a graph: a small set that includes one vertex from every cycle, or, equivalently, a small set of vertices whose removal destroys all cycles. This is a hard computational problem; if we are not able to solve it exactly, we can instead try to find lower and upper bounds on the size of the minimum feedback vertex set. One approach to find lower bounds is to find a collection of vertex-disjoint cycles in a graph. For example, consider the graph in Figure 1. The cycles A-B-C-F-A and G-H-I-J-G share no vertices. As a result, if we want to remove vertices and destroy all cycles in the graph, we must remove at least two vertices: one from the first cycle and one from the second. This line of reasoning generalizes: if we can find k vertex-disjoint cycles in a graph, then every feedback vertex set in the graph must have at least k vertices. Figure 1: in red, two vertex-disjoint cycles, A-B-C-F-A and G-H-I-J-G. In blue, a feedback vertex set {A,C,G}. Unfortunately, in general, this bound is not tight: if the largest collection of vertex-disjoint cycles in a graph contains k cycles, then it does not necessarily follow that there is a feedback vertex set of size k. The graph in Figure 1 is an example of this: even if we destroy cycle G-H-I-J-G by removing one of the vertices G, H, I, or J, we cannot destroy all four of the cycles A-B-C-F-A, A-B-E-F-A, B-C-D-E-B, and C-D-E-F-C by removing only one more vertex. Any minimum feedback vertex set in the graph in Figure 1 has three vertices: for example, the three vertices A, C, and G. It is possible to construct examples in which the gap between the two quantities - the size of the largest collection of vertex-disjoint cycles, and the size of the smallest feedback vertex set - is arbitrarily large. The Erdős–Pósa theorem says that despite this, knowing one quantity does put lower and upper bounds on the other quantity. Formally, the theorem states that there exists a function f:N→N:ℕ→ℕ such that for each positive integer k, every graph either contains a collection of k vertex-disjoint cycles, or has a feedback vertex set of at most f(k) vertices. For example, suppose we have determined that for the graph in Figure 1, there is a collection of 2 vertex-disjoint cycles, but no collection of 3 vertex-disjoint cycles. Our earlier argument says that the smallest feedback vertex set must have at least 2 vertices; the Erdős–Pósa theorem says that the smallest feedback vertex set must have at most f(3) vertices. In principle, many functions f could satisfy the theorem. For the purpose of discussing bounds on how large f(k) needs to be, we define the Erdős–Pósa function to give, for each positive integer k, the least value of f(k) for which the statement of the theorem holds. Bounds on the Erdős–Pósa