proof: The proof, speaking qualitatively, hinges on two premises:[6] A finite upper bound can be set on the total potentially accessible phase space volume. For a mechanical system, this bound can be provided by requiring that the system is contained in a bounded physical region of space (so that it cannot, for example, eject particles that never return) – combined with the conservation of energy, this locks the system into a finite region in phase space. The phase volume of a finite element under dynamics is conserved (for a mechanical system, this is ensured by Liouville's theorem). Imagine any finite starting volume D1_1 of the phase space and to follow its path under the dynamics of the system. The volume evolves through a "phase tube" in the phase space, keeping its size constant. Assuming a finite phase space, after some number of steps k1_1 the phase tube must intersect itself. This means that at least a finite fraction R1_1 of the starting volume is recurring. Now, consider the size of the non-returning portion D2_2 of the starting phase volume – that portion that never returns to the starting volume. Using the principle just discussed in the last paragraph, we know that if the non-returning portion is finite, then a finite part R2_2 of it must return after k2_2 steps. But that would be a contradiction, since in a number k3=_3=lcm(k1,k2)(k_1,k_2) of step, both R1_1 and R2_2 would be returning, against the hypothesis that only R1_1 was. Thus, the non-returning portion of the starting volume cannot be the empty set, i.e. all D1_1 is recurring after some number of steps. The theorem does not comment on certain aspects of recurrence which this proof cannot guarantee: There may be some special phases that never return to the starting phase volume, or that only return to the starting volume a finite number of times then never return again. These however are extremely "rare", making up an infinitesimal part of any starting volume. Not all parts of the phase volume need to return at the same time. Some will "miss" the starting volume on the first pass, only to make their return at a later time. Nothing prevents the phase tube from returning completely to its starting volume before all the possible phase volume is exhausted. A trivial example of this is the harmonic oscillator. Systems that do cover all accessible phase volume are called ergodic (this of course depends on the definition of "accessible volume"). What can be said is that for "almost any" starting phase, a system will eventually return arbitrarily close to that starting phase. The recurrence time depends on the required degree of closeness (the size of the phase volume). To achieve greater accuracy of recurrence, we need to take smaller initial volume, which means longer recurrence time. For a given phase in a volume, the recurrence is not necessarily a periodic recurrence. The second recurrence time does not need to be double the first recurrence time. Formal