In mathematics, Clifford's theorem on special divisors is a result of William K. Clifford (1878) on algebraic curves, showing the constraints on special linear systems on a curve C.


Statement[edit]
A divisor on a Riemann surface C is a formal sum D=∑PmPP=∑_Pm_PP of points P on C with integer coefficients. One considers a divisor as a set of constraints on meromorphic functions in the function field of C, defining L(D)(D) as the vector space of functions having poles only at points of D with positive coefficient, at most as bad as the coefficient indicates, and having zeros at points of D with negative coefficient, with at least that multiplicity. The dimension of L(D)(D) is finite, and denoted ℓ(D)ℓ(D). The linear system of divisors attached to D is the corresponding projective space of dimension ℓ(D)−1ℓ(D)-1. 
The other significant invariant of D is its degree d, which is the sum of all its coefficients.
A divisor is called special if ℓ(K − D) > 0, where K is the canonical divisor.[1]
Clifford's theorem states that for an effective special divisor D, one has:

2(ℓ(D)−1)≤d2(ℓ(D)-1),
and that equality holds only if D is zero or a canonical divisor, or if C is a hyperelliptic curve and D linearly equivalent to an integral multiple of a hyperelliptic divisor.
The Clifford index of C is then defined as the minimum  of d−2(ℓ(D)−1)-2(ℓ(D)-1)  taken over all special divisors (except canonical and trivial), and Clifford's theorem states this is non-negative. It can be shown that the Clifford index for a generic curve of genus g is equal to the floor function ⌊g−12⌋.⌊g-12⌋.
The Clifford index measures how far the curve is from being hyperelliptic. It may be thought of as a refinement of the gonality: in many cases the Clifford index is equal to the gonality minus 2.[2]

Green's conjecture[edit]
A conjecture of Mark Green states that the Clifford index for a curve over the complex numbers that is not hyperelliptic should be determined by the extent to which C as canonical curve has linear syzygies. In detail, one defines the invariant a(C) in terms of the minimal free resolution of the homogeneous coordinate ring of C in its canonical embedding, as the largest index i for which the graded Betti number βi, i + 2 is zero. Green and Robert Lazarsfeld showed that a(C) + 1 is a lower bound for the Clifford index, and Green's conjecture states that equality always holds. There are numerous partial results.[3]
Claire Voisin was awarded the Ruth Lyttle Satter Prize in Mathematics for her solution of the generic case of Green's conjecture in two papers.[4][5]  The case of Green's conjecture for generic curves had attracted a huge amount of effort by algebraic geometers over twenty years before finally being laid to rest by Voisin.[6] The conjecture for arbitrary curves remains open.

Notes[edit]


^ Hartshorne p.296

^ Eisenbud (2005) p.178

^ Eisenbud (2005) pp. 183-4.

^ Green's canonical syzygy conjecture for generic curves of odd genus - Claire Voisin

^ Green’s generic syzygy conjecture for curves of even genus lying on a K3 surface - Claire Voisin

^ Satter Prize


References[edit]
Arbarello, Enrico; Cornalba, Maurizio; Griffiths, Phillip A.; Harris, Joe (1985). Geometry of Algebraic Curves Volume I. Grundlehren de mathematischen Wisenschaften 267. ISBN 0-387-90997-4.
Clifford, William K. (1878), "On the Classification of Loci", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, The Royal Society, 169: 663–681, doi:10.1098/rstl.1878.0020, ISSN 0080-4614, JSTOR 109316
Eisenbud, David (2005). The Geometry of Syzygies.  A second course in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Vol. 229. New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-22215-4. Zbl 1066.14001.
Fulton, William (1974). Algebraic Curves. Mathematics Lecture Note Series. W.A. Benjamin. p. 212. ISBN 0-8053-3080-1.
Griffiths, Phillip A.; Harris, Joe (1994). Principles of Algebraic Geometry. Wiley Classics Library. Wiley Interscience. p. 251. ISBN 0-471-05059-8.
Hartshorne, Robin (1977). Algebraic Geometry. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Vol. 52. ISBN 0-387-90244-9.
External links[edit]
Iskovskikh, V.A. (2001) [1994], "Clifford theorem", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS Press
vteTopics in algebraic curvesRational curves
Five points determine a conic
Projective line
Rational normal curve
Riemann sphere
Twisted cubic
Elliptic curvesAnalytic theory
Elliptic function
Elliptic integral
Fundamental pair of periods
Modular form
Arithmetic theory
Counting points on elliptic curves
Division polynomials
Hasse's theorem on elliptic curves
Mazur's torsion theorem
Modular elliptic curve
Modularity theorem
Mordell–Weil theorem
Nagell–Lutz theorem
Supersingular elliptic curve
Schoof's algorithm
Schoof–Elkies–Atkin algorithm
Applications
Elliptic curve cryptography
Elliptic curve primality
Higher genus
De Franchis theorem
Faltings's theorem
Hurwitz's automorphisms theorem
Hurwitz surface
Hyperelliptic curve
Plane curves
AF+BG theorem
Bézout's theorem
Bitangent
Cayley–Bacharach theorem
Conic section
Cramer's paradox
Cubic plane curve
Fermat curve
Genus–degree formula
Hilbert's sixteenth problem
Nagata's conjecture on curves
Plücker formula
Quartic plane curve
Real plane curve
Riemann surfaces
Belyi's theorem
Bring's curve
Bolza surface
Compact Riemann surface
Dessin d'enfant
Differential of the first kind
Klein quartic
Riemann's existence theorem
Riemann–Roch theorem
Teichmüller space
Torelli theorem
Constructions
Dual curve
Polar curve
Smooth completion
Structure of curvesDivisors on curves
Abel–Jacobi map
Brill–Noether theory
Clifford's theorem on special divisors
Gonality of an algebraic curve
Jacobian variety
Riemann–Roch theorem
Weierstrass point
Weil reciprocity law
Moduli
ELSV formula
Gromov–Witten invariant
Hodge bundle
Moduli of algebraic curves
Stable curve
Morphisms
Hasse–Witt matrix
Riemann–Hurwitz formula
Prym variety
Weber's theorem (Algebraic curves)
Singularities
Acnode
Crunode
Cusp
Delta invariant
Tacnode
Vector bundles
Birkhoff–Grothendieck theorem
Stable vector bundle
Vector bundles on algebraic curves




