implications: There are a number of limitations to the theorem. In particular, spontaneous symmetry breaking of a gauge symmetry is allowed in a system with infinite spatial dimensions or a symmetry with an infinite number of variables, since in these cases there are infinite energy barriers between gauge related configurations. The theorem also does not apply to residual gauge degrees of freedom[9] nor large gauge transformations,[10] which can in principle be spontaneously broken. Furthermore, all current proofs rely on a lattice field theory formulation so they may be invalid in a genuine continuum field theory. It is therefore in principle plausible that there may exist exotic continuum theories for which gauge symmetries can be spontaneously broken, although such a scenario remains unlikely due to the absence of any known examples. Landau's classification of phases uses expectation values of local operators to determine the phase of the system. However, Elitzur's theorem shows that this approach is inadmissible in certain systems such as Yang–Mills theories for which no local operator can act as an order operator for confinement. Instead, to get around the theorem requires constructing nonlocal gauge invariant operators, whose expectation values need not be zero. The most common ones are Wilson loops and their thermal equivalents, Polyakov loops. Another nonlocal operator that acts as a order operator is the 't Hooft loop. Since gauge symmetries cannot be spontaneously broken, this calls into question the validity of the Higgs mechanism. In the usual presentation, the Higgs field has a potential that appears to give the Higgs field a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value. However, this is merely a consequence of imposing a gauge fixing, usually the unitary gauge. Any value of the vacuum expectation value can be acquired by an appropriate gauge fixing choice. Calculating the expectation value in a gauge invariant way always gives zero, in agreement with Elitzur's theorem. The Higgs mechanism can however be reformulated entirely in a gauge invariant way in what is known as the Fröhlich–Morchio–Strocchi mechanism which does not involve spontaneous symmetry breaking of any symmetry.[11] For non-abelian gauge groups that have a SU(2)SU(2) subgroup, this mechanism agrees with the Higgs mechanism, but for other gauge groups there can appear discrepancies between the two approaches. Elitzur's theorem can also be generalized to a larger notion of local symmetries where in a D-dimensional space, there can be symmetries that act uniformly on a d-dimensional hyperplanes. In this view, global symmetries act on D-dimensional hyperplanes while local symmetries act on 0-dimensional ones. The generalized Elitzur's theorem then provides bounds on the vacuum expectation values of operators that are non-invariant under such d-dimensional symmetries.[12] This theorem has numerous applications in condensed matter systems where such symmetries appear. See