Theory: A field theory admits numerous types of symmetries, with the two most common ones being global and local symmetries. Global symmetries are fields transformations acting the same way everywhere while local symmetries act on fields in a position dependent way. The latter correspond to redundancies in the description of the system. This is a consequence of Noether's second theorem which shows that each gauge symmetry degree of freedom corresponds to a relation among the Euler–Lagrange equations, making the system underdetermined. Underdeterminacy requires gauge fixing of the non-propagating components so that the equations of motion admits a unique solution.[3] Spontaneous symmetry breaking occurs when the action of a theory has a symmetry but the vacuum state violates this symmetry. In that case there will exist a local operator that is non-invariant under the symmetry giving it a nonzero vacuum expectation value. Such non-invariant local operators always have vanishing vacuum expectation values for finite size systems prohibiting spontaneous symmetry breaking. This occurs because over large timescales, finite systems always transition between all its possible ground states, averaging away the expectation value to zero.[4] While spontaneous symmetry breaking can occur for global symmetries, Elitzur's theorem states that the same is not the case for gauge symmetries; all vacuum expectation values of gauge non-invariant operators are vanishing, even in systems of infinite size.[5] On the lattice this follows from the fact that integrating gauge non-invariant observables over a group measure always yields zero for compact gauge groups.[6] Positivity of the measure and gauge invariance are sufficient to prove the theorem.[7] This is also an explanation for why gauge symmetries are mere redundancies in lattice field theories, where the equations of motion need not define a well-posed problem as they do not need to be solved. Instead, Elitzur's theorem shows that any observable that is not invariant under the symmetry has a vanishing expectation value making it unobservable and thus redundant. Showing that a system admits spontaneous symmetry breaking requires introducing a weak external source field that breaks the symmetry and gives rise to a preferred ground state. The system is then taken to the thermodynamic limit after which the external source field is switched off. If the vacuum expectation value of symmetry non-invariant operators is nonzero in this limit then there is spontaneous symmetry breaking.[8] Physically it means that the system never leaves the original ground state into which it was placed by the external field. For global symmetries this occurs because the energy barrier between the various ground states is proportional to the volume, so in the thermodynamic limit this diverges, locking the system into the ground state. Local symmetries get around this construction because the energy barrier between two ground states depends only on local features so transitions to different gauge related ground states can occur locally and does not require the field to change everywhere at the same time as it does for global symmetries. Limitations and