
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkAWARDS| SEPTEMBER 01 2022
2022 AAPT award citations at the summer meeting in Grand
Rapids, Michigan 
Am. J. Phys.  90, 650–651 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0109827
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
2009 Distinguished Service Citations A warded to Alan Gibson, David Maiullo, Bruce Mason, Mary Winn,
and Mel Steinberg
The Physics T eacher  (October 2009)
Chris Chiaverina to Receive the AAPT Distinguished Service Citation at 2010 Summer Meeting
AAPT Distinguished Service Citations—February 1977
American Journal of Physics  (June 1977) 04 October 2023 23:15:29
AWARDS
2022 AAPT award citations at the summer meeting in Grand Rapids, Michigan
Wolfgang Christian—2022 Lillian McDermott Medal
The Lillian McDermott Medal recognizes those who are
passionate and tenacious about improving the teaching andlearning of physics and have made intellectually creative
contributions in this area.
Wolfgang Christian is the Lillian McDermott Medal
awardee for 2022. Christian, the Brown Professor of Physics
Emeritus at Davidson College, is probably best known for
his development of the high-quality interactive computer-based resources, Physlets and Open Source Physics (OSP),which are freely available to all teachers and students on the
AAPT ComPADRE digital library.
Regarding his receipt of the McDermott Medal, Christian
said, “I am honored and humbled to receive the ﬁrst Lillian
McDermott Medal. The work that the Open Source Physics
team has done using computation to help students overcomeconceptual difﬁculties rests on the Physics Education
Research foundation that Lillian helped build. We all stand
on the shoulders of giants and Lillian was indeed a giant.”
Christian received his B.S. and Ph.D. from North Carolina
State University. He began his career as an assistant profes-
sor teaching at Mercyhurst College, Allegheny College, andEarlham College before moving to Davidson College in
1983 where he was appointed to various positions, including
Davidson Physics Computation Center Director, Professor,Physics Department Chair, and Brown Professor of Physics.
In 2006 he was named an APS Fellow, being cited “For
his years of dedication and signiﬁcant contributions to theuse of computers in undergraduate physics education, espe-cially for his creation, design, and effective use of interactive
curricular materials.” In 2009 the Southeastern Section of
APS recognized him with the Pegram Award for Excellencein the Teaching of Physics. He served as the APS Forum on
Education Vice-Chair, Chair-Elect, Chair, and Past-Chair.From 2001 to 2004 he chaired the APS Ad-Hoc committeeto establish the APS Excellence in Physics Education
Award, and he and Fred Stein raised over $100,000 to endow
that award.
In 2003 AAPT recognized Christian’s service with the
Homer L. Dodge Citation. He was a founding member of theNorth Carolina Section of AAPT in 1996 and served inthe Section’s presidential chain from 2009 through 2012. In2013 he was elected to the AAPT Board of Directors asSecretary. In that role, he served as chair of the PublicationsCommittee and as a member of the Award, Venture Fund,and Governance Structure Committees. He was named aFellow of the American Association of Physics Teachers in2014.
Christian has had a huge impact on the physics education
community and has helped usher in computational physics inhigh school, undergraduate, and graduate education aroundthe country and the world. He worked with Harvey Gouldand Jan Tobochnick on the third edition of An Introduction
to Computer Simulation Methods and he developed the OSP
code library for that book. He and two of his colleagues whodeveloped Physlets (Mario Belloni and Anne Cox) workedwith both the Two-Year College (TYC) Workshop Projectand the Advanced Technology Education Physics WorkshopProject. This collaboration started in 2001 and is ongoing. In2011 Open Source Physics and the AAPT-ComPADRE team
led by Bruce Mason and Lyle Barbato were awarded the
AAAS Science Prize for Online Research in Education(SPORE) for “the development of online tools that bringinteractive computer-based modeling to students at manylevels.” In 2020 the 18 members of the Open Source Physicscollaboration were recognized by the APS with theExcellence in Physics Education Award. The team was cited,“For sustained commitment to computational physics educa-tion through creating and disseminating programming envi-ronments, books, software, simulations, and other tools tosupport computational thinking, and for research establishingthe value of these tools and best practices for their use.”
Christian’s OSP team collaborated with Gay Stewart and
the College Ready in Mathematics and Physics Partnership(CR-MSP) and with Tom O’Kuma and Dwain Desbian onthe Two Year College (TYC) project in multi-day workshopsproviding many hours of training in OSP-developed materi-als. The weeklong CR-MSP workshops introduced Arkansasin-service teachers to OSP simulations and video analysistools and the TYC workshops engaged 280 high school andtwo-year college physics faculty participants (20 per work-shop) from many different institutions in different statesaround the country. Each workshop participant used the OSPmaterials to develop curricular materials that they would usein their classes. They then presented their developed lesson/
650 Am. J. Phys. 90(9), September 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2022 Author(s) 650 04 October 2023 23:15:29
lab/simulation to the rest of the participants for suggestions.
All developed lessons/labs/simulations were electronicallycaptured and given to all participants.
Note: During the Spring 2021 AAPT Board of Directors’
(BOD) meeting, the AAPT Board voted unanimously toremove Robert A. Millikan’s name from the award that rec-
ognizes “those who have made notable and intellectually
creative contributions to the teaching of physics.” The AAPTthen sought nominations from AAPT members for renamingthe award. Based upon nominations from members, the BODunanimously approved giving the award its new name, theLillian McDermott Medal.
Sean J. Bentley—2022 David Halliday and Robert
Resnick Award for Excellence in Undergraduate
Physics Teaching
The David Halliday and Robert Resnick Award for
Excellence in Undergraduate Physics Teaching was estab-lished as the Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching Award
in 1993. It was renamed and substantially endowed in 2010
by John Wiley and Sons. Named for David Halliday andRobert Resnick, the award recognizes outstanding achieve-ment in teaching undergraduate physics.
Sean J. Bentley received the 2022 David Halliday and
Robert Resnick Award for Excellence in Undergraduate
Physics Teaching.
Regarding his selection for this award, Bentley said,
“Teaching is my passion, so being recognized by my peersin an organization that genuinely values teaching is a great
honor. The past two years have emphasized the point that
effective teaching is a constantly moving target, and this
award provides me with encouragement to keep growing andevolving as an educator. If I can be a small part in helping
students on their way to becoming successful professionals,
that is the ultimate reward this job provides.”
Associate Professor at Adelphi University’s Department
of Physics, Bentley earned his B.S. and M.S. in Electrical
Engineering at the University of Missouri-Rolla (nowMissouri University of Science and Technology). His Ph.D.
in Optics was earned at the University of Rochester.
He spent two years as Director of the Society of Physics
Students (SPS) and Sigma Pi Sigma (the physics honor soci-
ety) and has been a professor for nearly 19 years. In 2013,
Bentley was nominated by his students and recognized bythe Adelphi University faculty and administration with the
Teaching Excellence Award for Tenured Professors. This is
no small feat for a physics professor, as typically they teachsome of the hardest material on campus. It was additionallyimpressive considering his reputation among the students as
a demanding professor. But what is really amazing is his
connection with the students. Students pile out of his ofﬁcealmost daily. He patiently works with all students who want
help.
In co-curricular activities his teaching and leadership are
outstanding. Adelphi University’s Physics Club remains rec-
ognized as an Outstanding Physics Club by SPS for over ﬁf-
teen years largely because of Bentley’s work with thestudents. He teaches them to run events, how to be leaders,
and how to ﬁnd jobs. He is a behind-the-scenes guy who
makes things happen and then steps away when the awardsare given out.
Bentley’s scholarship is also based in the teaching model,
as he leads a student-focused, undergraduate research pro-gram. He has had an impressive list of students who have
done research in his lab over the years. He keeps using every
opportunity to enrich each student’s life and is a successfulmentor.
Three new fellows of AAPT were announced in the
Summer 2022 meeting:
Geraldine Cochran, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ
Laura McCullough, University of Wisconsin-Stout,Menomonie, WI
Arlisa Richardson, Chandler-Gilbert Community College,
Gilbert, AZ
Information on Debbie Andres, the 2022 Doc Brown
Futures Awardee; Paula Heron, awarded the Homer L.Dodge Citation for Distinguished Service to AAPT; and
Andres R. Torres, the 2022 Paul Zitzewitz K–12 Teaching
Awardee, appears in The Physics Teacher.
651 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Awards 651 04 October 2023 23:15:29
