
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkAWARDS| MARCH 01 2022
2022 AAPT award citations at the virtual winter meeting 
Am. J. Phys.  90, 167–168 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0086306
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
AAPT/PTRA — A Part of the Solution
Phys. T each.  (December 201 1)
Homer Dodge Distinguished Service Citations
Phys. T each.  (February 2022)
2009 Distinguished Service Citations A warded to Alan Gibson, David Maiullo, Bruce Mason, Mary Winn,
and Mel Steinberg
The Physics T eacher  (October 2009) 04 October 2023 23:03:14
AWARDS
2022 AAPT award citations at the virtual winter meeting
Homer L. Dodge Citations for Distinguished Service
to AAPT
The Homer L. Dodge Citation for Distinguished Service to
AAPT is presented to members in recognition of their excep-
tional contributions to the association at the national, sec-tional, or local level.
Arlisa Richardson
Regarding her selection to
receive this citation, Richardson
said, “What an honor! I appre-
ciate the opportunities to serveAAPT.” Professor Richardson
obtained her BS in physics
from the Grambling State
University, her ﬁrst MS in
Physics at the University ofTexas at Dallas, and a second
MS in Engineering of
Materials at the Arizona State
University. She worked as an
engineer in the semiconductormanufacturing industry before
returning to graduate school, and in 2008, she completed a
Ph.D. in Curriculum and Instruction specializing in Science
Education at Arizona State University. In 2011, she accepted a
physics faculty position at Chandler Gilbert CommunityCollege. She has served on the AAPT Board as a Member-at-
Large, and she also served on a number of AAPT committees as
the ex ofﬁcio At-Large Two-Year College Board representative
(e.g., Audit, Venture, and COGS). Additionally, she has pro-
vided valuable service on other AAPT Committees: Committeeon Physics in Two-Year Colleges (2016–2018), Programs
Committee (2019-present), and Lotze Scholarship Committee
(2018-present). She joined The Physics Teacher editorial board
in July 2021 for a three-year term. She is very committed to
reducing the barriers and improving the representation of mar-ginalized students in physics. She represented the US delegation
to the 6th International Conference on Women in Physics
(ICWIP) in Birmingham UK in 2017. She was also part of the
AIP TEAM-UP Task Force (see https://www.aip.org/diversity-
initiatives/team-up-taskforce ), which investigated why the pro-
portion of undergraduate degrees earned by African Americans
remains low. The Task Force prepared a report that was released
in early 2020, which laid the groundwork for the physics com-
munity to increase physics degrees by African Americans. She
writes, “AAPT has provided the extra support, resources, andnetworking needed speciﬁcally for two-year college faculty.
The AAPT Two-Year College group promotes successful peda-
gogical practices that are also beneﬁcial to four-year collegesand universities. The exchange of knowledge and experiences is
invaluable. I welcome the opportunity to be a voice for two-year
college faculty within AAPT.”
Dimitri Dounas-Frazer
Regarding his selection
to receive this citation,
Dounas-Frazer said, “I’mdeeply grateful to the
people who nominated
me for this award.Volunteering for AAPT
and organizing for change
in physics education hasbeen a rewarding—and
often challenging—expe-
rience. Doing so has pro-vided me the opportunity
to work with and learn
from diverse groups ofstudents, staff, faculty,and other stakeholders in
secondary and post-secondary contexts. I hope that the
efforts I’ve been part of ultimately do more good than harm.Sadly, physics education has a long way to go when it comes
to eradicating systemic and interpersonal ableism, racism,
cis-hetero-sexism, and commitments to capitalism and colo-nialism.” Dounas-Frazer earned his Bachelors and Masters
Degrees from the Colorado School of Mines and his Ph.D.
from the University of California, Berkeley. He has been amember of AAPT since 2012 and has served in various lead-
ership positions, including as the AAPT representative to the
AIP Liaison Committee on Under-represented Minoritiesand as the At-large Four-Year College representative of the
AAPT Colorado-Wyoming Section. He has also volunteered
for AAPT as the Vice Chair and then Chair for theCommittee on Diversity in Physics from 2015 to 2017 and
for the Committee on
Laboratories from 2018 to
2020. He currently serveson the AAPT Nominating
Committee.
Dave McCachren
Regarding his selection
to receive this citation,
McCachren said, “AAPT &PTRA were an importantasset to my high school
teaching career. I was
totally surprised when
167 Am. J. Phys. 90(3), March 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2022 Author(s) 167 04 October 2023 23:03:14
notiﬁed of this prestigious award. I am humbled to be
included with the recipients who continue to promote phys-ics and teaching at the section and national levels. Thankyou!” McCachren earned his Bachelors and Masters Degreesat Indiana University of Pennsylvania and has his Teaching
Certiﬁcation in Pennsylvania in Instructional II Physics and
Mathematics. He joined AAPT and the Central PennsylvaniaSection of AAPT in 1973 and became a PTRA in 1995, par-ticipating in the Summer Workshops each year since then.He served as Workshop Leader for National PTRA TrainingSessions in 2012 and 2017. He co-authored the PTRA learn-ing resource “Electromagnetic Spectrum: Window to theUniverse” a workshop written in conjunction with NASAGoddard Space Flight Center. Since 1995 he has led PTRA
workshops for High School and Middle School teachers in
Central Pennsylvania, Baltimore, Maryland.
Steve Henning
Regarding his selection to
receive this citation, Hennings a i d ,“ I th a sb e e na nh o n o r
and pleasure to serve AAPT
as a PTRA and in othercapacities. I look forward tocontinuing to serve thephysics teaching commu-nity, especially when wewill meet again in person.”Henning has had a very suc-cessful career as a High
School Physics Teacher,teaching all levels of physicsin New York state. Additionally, he served two years as an
adjunct professor of introductory physics at Concordia Collegein Bronxville NY. What makes his career so celebrated is hewas among the early innovators who brought technology intothe physics classroom as early as 1985 and shared his expertise
as a leader of many workshops with his colleagues. His alle-
giance to his profession outside of his classroom has beenfocused on being active in AAPT locally, regionally, and nation-a l l y .H eb e c a m eaP T R Ai n1 9 8 6a n da t t e n d e dt r a i n i n gs e s s i o n sfor 23 years and plans to continue attending PTRA training ses-sions. He not only served his students but also fellow teachers inhis school district with the PTRA materials. He also carries outthe mission of the PTRA program by conducting workshops inN e wJ e r s e y ,N e wY o r kC i t y ,N e wY o r kS t a t e ,a n dN e wEngland with fellow PTRAs utilizing PTRA Manuals and mate-
rials. He remains active on the national level in the PTRA pro-
gram as a member of the PTRA Oversight Committee. From2006 to 2009, he served as the Lead PTRA for the AAPT-PTRARural Physics Teachers Workshops at Colgate University in NY.From 2016 to present, he served on the Physics Master TeacherLeader Task Force. His committee service in AAPT includes theCommittee on Physics in High Schools (2013–2014),Committee on Teacher Preparation (2016–2018, 2022-),Nominating Committee (2018), and the Committee for Designand Implementation of High School Video Contest (2011). He
has served on the Executive Board of New York State AAPT
S e c t i o nf r o m2 0 1 1t op r e s e n ta n da l s oi sam e m b e ro ft h eN e wEngland Section of AAPT.
One new fellow of AAPT was announced in the Winter
2022 meeting:
Bree Barnett Dreyfuss, Pleasanton, CA
Chandralekha Singh
Past-President, AAPT
168 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Awards 168 04 October 2023 23:03:14
