
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkAWARDS| MARCH 01 2023
2022 AAPT award citations at the winter meeting in Portland,
Oregon 
Am. J. Phys.  91, 167–169 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0143043
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Accelerating low-carbon development in Portland, Oregon and Kunming, Y unnan
J. Renewable Sustainable Energy  (August 2015)
X ‐ray dif fraction at Portland
Physics T oday  (October 1965)
Underwater acoustics education at Portland State University
J Acoust Soc Am  (October 2014) 04 October 2023 22:49:57
AWARDS
2022 AAPT award citations at the winter meeting in Portland, Oregon
Kimberly Ann Coble – 2023 John David Jackson
Excellence in Graduate Physics Education Award
The American Association
of Physics Teachers
(AAPT) awarded the John
David Jackson Excellence
in Graduate Physics
Education Award for 2023
to Kimberly Ann Coble,
P r o f e s s o ro fP h y s i c sa tS a n
Francisco State University,
in recognition of her work
as a teacher of graduate
Physics and Astronomy.
She is a pioneer in graduate
physics and astronomy
education.
Coble earned her B.A.
in Physics, Astronomy, and Astrophysics at the University of
Pennsylvania. Both her M.S. and Ph.D. in Astronomy and
Astrophysics were earned at the University of Chicago. She
was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of California,
Santa Barbara and a National Science Foundation
Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellow at the
University of Chicago and Adler Planetarium.
At San Francisco State University (SFSU), she created a
new course called PHYS 885: Inclusive Pedagogy for thePhysical Sciences. Nearly all master’s students who areGraduate Teaching Assistants (GTAs) in Physics and
Astronomy at SFSU take this class to learn how to become
more effective teachers for the ever more diverse studentsenrolling in the physical sciences. Despite a third of under-graduate students belonging to groups underrepresented in
the physical sciences, fewer than 5% of graduate degrees are
eventually awarded to these students. The problem is com-plex, but part of the solution is better training of the GTAswho teach undergraduate students in lower-division intro-
ductory laboratory courses. These are often the ﬁrst instruc-
tors that undergraduates see in smaller class settings, yetGTAs typically have little training in teaching. Coble’scourse introduces GTAs to evidence-based, student-centered,
equitable and inclusive teaching strategies, the social science
literature on cultural capital, asset framing and growth mind-sets, stereotype threat, and micro- vs macro-aggressions vs
afﬁrmations. The course is practical, helping GTAs learn
how to create lesson plans and differentiated assessments,identify desirable student learning outcomes, and designgrading rubrics. GTAs also reﬂect on their teaching practice
and collaborate with peers to identify successes and chal-
lenges in their teaching.
Throughout her career, she has created opportunities for
graduate students and beyond to become involved inresearch in meaningful ways and to engage in academic
work, such as presenting at conferences and writing manu-scripts for publication, and she has supported them in these
efforts. When these students attend conferences, Coble goes
out of her way to help students network, identify learning
opportunities, and model academic engagement so that they
get the most out of their experience.
She led the development of “Big Ideas in Cosmology,” a
ﬂexible, interactive set of online modules on cosmology thatinstructors use at many levels, from graduate and upper-
division undergraduate majors to lower division courses for
non-majors. The modules use active learning design ele-ments, particularly those that leverage personal computing
tools, so that students engage with real data through a scaf-
folded approach that facilitates knowledge construction. The
modules are also explicit in representing the diversity of
both real and imagined people studying cosmology, throughproﬁles of a variety of scientists and the use of varied and
diverse student names in activities, respectively.
Coble’s work in teaching, mentoring of, and curriculum
development for graduate students in astronomy and physics
is outstanding. She is training a generation of new scholarswho are helping to change the culture of physics and astron-
omy pedagogy to be more inclusive and equitable. In recog-
nition of her sustained leadership in these endeavors, Coble
was elected as a Legacy Fellow in the inaugural class of the
American Astronomical Society Fellows Program in 2020.
S. James Gates, Jr., – 2023 Oersted Medal
Dr. Sylvester James
Gates, Jr., has been
named as the 2023
recipient of the presti-
gious Hans ChristianOersted Medal, pre-
sented by the American
Association of PhysicsTeachers (AAPT). The
Oersted Medal recognizes
his outstanding, wide-spread, and lasting impact
on the teaching of physics
through his national lead-
ership in physics educa-
tion, his exceptionalservice to AAPT, and his
mentoring of students and
in-service teachers.
The year 2022 marks Gates’s ﬁfty-ﬁrst consecutive year
of service as a university instructor in mathematics and phys-ics. In July 2022, he returned to the University of Maryland,
where he holds the Clark Leadership Chair in Science in the
167 Am. J. Phys. 91(3), March 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2023 Author(s) 167 04 October 2023 22:49:57
Department of Physics and School of Public Policy at the
University of Maryland at College Park (UMCP). He had
spent the previous six years at Brown University where he
held appointments as the Brown Theoretical Physics CenterDirector, the Ford Foundation Professor of Physics, anAfﬁliate Mathematics Professor, and a Faculty Fellow of the
Watson Institute for International Studies and Public Affairs.
From 1985 to 2016, he was a faculty member at theUniversity of Maryland, College Park as a UniversitySystem Regents Professor, the John S. Toll Professor of
Physics, the Director of the String and Particle Theory
Center, and an Afﬁliate Professor of Mathematics.
Gates’s dedication to shaping policy that will improve
equity is reﬂected in his service on the Maryland State Board
of Education from 2009 to 2016 and as president of both theNational Society of Black Physicists and the AmericanPhysical Society. In his role in the presidential line of the
American Physical Society, he pushed the organization for-
ward signiﬁcantly in its efforts to improve DEI in physics.
He has worked to improve science education, particularly
at the undergraduate level, through his service on advisory
boards and task forces. During the Obama administration, heserved on the U.S. President’s Council of Advisors on
Science and Technology (PCAST) and was the co-chair of
the PCAST working groups for STEM Education which pre-sented recommendations to the President. The seminalreports that were part of this effort, “Prepare and Inspire,”
and “Engage to Excel” were extremely useful to science edu-
cators around the world, providing a scientiﬁc rationale forthe importance of science and math as well as how we needto increase access to these ﬁelds for all students.
In 2013, President Obama awarded Gates the 2011
National Medal of Science, the highest recognition given bythe U.S. to scientists with the citation, “For his contribution
to the mathematics of supersymmetry in particle, ﬁeld, and
string theories and his extraordinary efforts to engage thepublic on the beauty and wonder of fundamental physics.”He also is an elected member of the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences and the American Philosophical Society.
In 2013, he was elected to the National Academy ofSciences, becoming the ﬁrst African-American theoretical
physicist so recognized in its 150-year history for his signiﬁ-
cant contributions to the ﬁeld of physics, his commitment toincreasing the participation of underrepresented groups inSTEM, and his dedication to improve physics education.
In service to AAPT, Gates was an active member of the
Physics and Astronomy New Faculty Workshop (NFW)Advisory Board. The NFW advisory board has helped the
organizers improve the workshops and create a more impact-
ful experience for participants. This feedback helped shapefuture workshops, including proposals to NSF to continuefunding the NFW.
The Joint Task Force on Undergraduate Physics Programs
(J-TUPP), convened by AAPT and APS, was charged withengaging and informing physicists in answering the question:
What skills and knowledge should the next generation of
undergraduate physics degree holders possess to be well pre-pared for a diverse set of careers? Gates provided animportant perspective as someone who mentored many
undergraduate students and served on PCAST during aperiod in which undergraduate STEM education was a focus.Many physics departments are now using the report to imple-ment improvements in their curricula.
Several years ago, the AIP Liaison Committee on
Underrepresented Minorities was dismayed that the numberof African Americans receiving undergraduate degrees inphysics had not increased in many years. The committeeapproached the AIP Board of Directors to approve a study todevelop concrete steps to implement positive change for thiscritical issue of diversity, equity, and inclusion. The AIPBoard approved the study and the AIP National Task Force toElevate African American Representation in UndergraduatePhysics and Astronomy (TEAM-UP) was formed with Gatesserving as a member of the task force. The TEAM UP taskforce spent two years investigating the reasons for the persis-
tent underrepresentation of African Americans in physics and
astronomy. Its report stimulated the formation of the collec-tive action initiative that is investing substantial resourceswith the aim of doubling the number of African American stu-dents earning physics and astronomy bachelor’s degreesannually by 2030.
Jocelyn Bell Burnell – 2023 Richtmyer Memorial
Lecture Award
Jocelyn Bell Burnell was
selected to receive the2023 Richtmyer MemorialLecture Award. She isrecognized with the awardfor outstanding contribu-tions to physics and foreffective communications
with physics educators.
During Bell Burnell’s
post-graduate studies atthe University ofCambridge, she workedon the construction of the
Interplanetary Scintillation Array just outside Cambridge tostudy quasars, which had recently been discovered. On 28November 1967, she detected a “bit of scruff” on her chart-
recorder papers that tracked across the sky with the stars.
She established that the signal was pulsing with great regu-larity at a rate of about one pulse every 1.3 s. Temporarilydubbed “Little Green Man,” the source was identiﬁed afterseveral years as a rapidly rotating neutron star. The DailyTelegraph science reporter shortened “pulsating radiosource” to pulsar.
She has become an icon among scientists not only for her
indisputable discovery of pulsars as a young graduate studentbut also because of her lifetime of consistent dedication to
lifting up and supporting all those who want to study physics
with both her voice and funding.
She has taught and worked at the University of
Southampton, University College London, the Royal
168 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 Awards 168 04 October 2023 22:49:57
Observatory, the Open University, Princeton University, and
the University of Oxford, where she currently holds the posi-tion of Visiting Professor in the Department of Physics andProfessorial Fellowship in Mansﬁeld College, in addition toher leadership as Chancellor of the University of Dundee
since 2018.
Bell Burnell was appointed Commander of the Order of
the British Empire (CBE) in 1999 and Dame (DBE) in 2007for services to astronomy. She was elected as a member ofthe Royal Society in 2003 and received a Royal Medal in
2015. She has received the Copley Medal and the Michael
Faraday Prize, along with at least 20 other prizes and numer-ous honorary degrees. In 2016, the Institute of Physicsrenamed its award for early career female physicists in herhonor.
She has demonstrated leadership and vision in numerous
positions in her career. She is a past president of the RoyalAstronomical Society and the Institute of Physics. In 2018,she was a recipient of the Breakthrough Prize in FundamentalPhysics. She dedicated the entire prize (3 million dollars) toestablish the Bell Burnell Graduate Scholarship Fund, admin-istered by the UK Institute of Physics (IOP), designed to helpfemale, minority, and refugee students become physicsresearchers. Her dedication to students and encouraging thestudy of physics is world renowned.
She has become one of the leading supporters of the
Sigma PI Sigma Physics Congress events, serving as a ple-nary speaker, and continuing as the honorary chair of theevent. Her fame and brilliance are delicately balanced by
humility, and she presents to everyone she meets as giving
and kind, often described as “down to earth,” despite the factthat her scientiﬁc accomplishments have taken us far beyondour planet. She has consistently expressed her wonder at theexcitement and energy of the students and the gratitude forthe many teachers that spur them toward their enthusiasm forphysics. She truly is dedicated to making sure that the ﬁeldof physics is well equipped to continue making the kind ofdiscoveries that she was able to make as a young scientist.
Darsa Donelan – 2023 Recipient of the Doc Brown
Futures Award
The 2023 recipient of the Doc Brown Futures Award is
Darsa Donelan. The Doc Brown Futures Award recognizesearly career members who demonstrate excellence in theircontributions to AAPT and physics education and exhibit thepotential to serve in an AAPT leadership role.
“Being selected for this award has made me feel very
accepted by the physics teaching community which is notsomething that I have
always felt from the
broader physics commu-
nity. I am so happy to bevalued for who I am and
what I do.” said Donelan.
A member of AAPT
since 2014, they earned a
B.S. in Physics and B.A.
in Mathematics atMassachusetts College of
Liberal Arts and a Ph.D.
in Physics at the
University of Florida. Donelan is Continuing Assistant
Professor at Gustavus Adolphus College in Saint Peter,
Minnesota.
In 2019, Donelan joined the AAPT/NASA collaboration
to produce space science themed educational supplements
supported by a grant from NASA. Their scientiﬁc back-ground in planetary science and obvious skill in teaching andworking with students made for an ideal addition to the
team. They expanded the context area beyond heliosphysics
to include subjects like planetary science. This led to thedevelopment of tutorials on Habitable Zones, Exoplanet
Atmospheres, and Stellar Spectra. Donelan was essential not
only to the development of these materials but also in theprofessional development provided to teachers around their
use. Moreover, they have increasingly played a leadership
role, attending meetings of the Space Science andAstronomy committee, representing the team.
Donelan brings the same care to their service work that
they do to their teaching. At Gustavus Adolphus College,they have served on the Nobel Conference Planning
Committee and advised both physics clubs (Rocketry Club
and Society of Physics Students) and clubs that support mar-ginalized students (Womxn in Physics Club, Queers and
Allies). Their work extends beyond their own college.
Donelan has been important to the success of the FacultyOnline Learning Communities that follow the AAPT’s New
Faculty Workshop, always willing to help colleagues.
One new fellow of AAPT was announced in the Winter
2023 meeting:
Richard Gelderman , Western Kentucky University,
Bowling Green, KY
Information on Glenda Denicolo andAlice Flarend,
the honorees of the Homer L. Dodge Citation forDistinguished Service to AAPT, appears in
The Physics Teacher.
169 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 Awards 169 04 October 2023 22:49:57
