
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkAWARDS| AUGUST 01 2023
2023 AAPT award citations at the summer meeting in
Sacramento, California 
Beth Parks  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 577–578 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0161894
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Sacramento Peak Solar T elescope
Physics T oday  (January 1964)
Ninety never sounded so good: Guiding an historical auditorium into the 21st century
J Acoust Soc Am  (October 2017)
Solar telescope
Physics T oday  (May 1966) 04 October 2023 22:54:21
AWARDS
2023 AAPT award citations at the summer meeting in Sacramento, California
Jeffrey Bennett—2023 Klopsteg Memorial Lecture
Award
Jeffrey Bennett, astronomer,
teacher, and writer, is the
2023 recipient of theKlopsteg Memorial LectureAward. This award recog-nizes educators who havemade notable and creativecontributions to the teachingof physics.
Regarding his selection to
receive the 2023 Klopsteg
Award Bennett said, “I’m
very honored to r eceive this
award, especially since it comes from the AmericanAssociation of Physics Teachers, which represents a groupof outstanding educators who share my passion for usingphysics—and science in general—to help us create a better andmore just world for everyone.”
Bennett received a B.A. in Biophysics from the University
of California at San Diego and an M.S. and Ph.D. inAstrophysics from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Specializing in mathematics and science education, he writes
for and speaks to audiences ranging from elementary schoolchildren to university faculty.
For more than 30 years, Bennett has successfully advanced
the cause of public understanding of physics. Key achieve-ments include:
•Serving as the ﬁrst “Visiting Senior Scientist” at NASA
Headquarters whose focus was speciﬁcally on education
and outreach. In this role, he launched a transformative
effort at NASA that vastly expanded public outreach byscientists engaged in astrophysics missions and research.
•Creating the concept for a new and innovative type of
scale model solar system exhibit, ﬁrst at the University of
Colorado and then with the Voyage scale model solar sys-tem (for which he served as co-PI), the ﬁrst permanentinstallation on the U.S. National Mall in Washington, DC
to be focused speciﬁcally on science education. The
Voyage model depicts the Sun, the planets, and the distan-ces between them on a scale of one to ten billion, provid-
ing visitors an accurate sense of the vastness of our solar
system, a unique perspective on the beauty and fragility ofour home planet, and the inspirational message embodiedin the fact that our species has managed to learn so much
about other worlds. Dr. Bennett continues to work with
the Voyage National Program (voyagesolarsystem.org) tospread Voyage “Mark II” models around the nation.
•Leading creation of the free Totality app (bigkidscience.-
com/eclipse/), which helps people plan for upcoming solar
eclipses and learn eclipse science. He is currently in theprocess of donating ownership of the app to the American
Astronomical Society, through which it is likely to beused by millions of people for the upcoming 2023 annularand 2024 total solar eclipses.
•Creating and freely posting a complete middle-school cur-riculum for Earth and Space Science (grade8science.com).
•Creating and freely posting a “global warming primer”(globalwarmingprimer.com) and engaging with the publicon a free speaking tour that has encompassed more than40 venues and an estimated 10,000 people.
•During 2014 and 2015, engaging with the public in a free
speaking tour on Einstein’s theory of relativity at approxi-
mately 25 venues and reaching an estimated 10,000people.
•Presenting school assemblies on concepts of astronomyand astrobiology for K–12 children—more than 200schools (jeffreybennett.com/events/school-list/), reachingan estimated 100,000 students.
•Writing seven critically acclaimed science books for chil-dren, all of which have been selected for launch to theInternational Space Station for the Story Time FromSpace program (storytimefromspace.com).
•Writing six critically acclaimed books for the general pub-lic on topics, including the search for extraterrestrial life,Einstein’s theory of relativity, global warming, leadingmysteries of astrophysics, the role of mathematics ineveryday life, and methods of science teaching.
Catherine Herne—2023 Homer L. Dodge Citation
Catherine Herne received
the AAPT’s Homer L.Dodge Citation forDistinguished Service to
AAPT during the 2023
Summer Meeting. Hernewas honored for tireless ser-
vice to bringing attention to
the importance of equitablelearning spaces, and forexceptional contributions
and consistent leadership
that have helped developfoundational principles and
structure to serve as a guide for realizing AAPT diversity.
Regarding her selection to receive this citation, Herne
said, “I am honored to receive this award as a part of
AAPT’s movement towards a more diverse, inclusive, and
equitable association and physics community. I continue tobe amazed by the efforts of AAPT members and staff andtheir commitment to this ongoing work.”
Herne is an Associate Professor in the Department of
Physics and Astronomy at the State University of New York
577 Am. J. Phys. 91(8), August 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2023 Author(s) 577 04 October 2023 22:54:21
at New Paltz. She earned an A.B. in Physics and
Mathematics at Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, PA and a
Ph.D. in Applied Physics at the University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI.
Herne has been a key leader of AAPT’s Diversity Equity
and Inclusion (DEI) Task Force. The efforts of the Task
Force will reshape the Association’s understanding of how
to best serve its diverse membership and will support bothteachers and students of physics in the 21st century. Her
leadership was central, and her work enabled the Task Force
to complete its initial goals.
Additionally, Herne serves in other roles in AAPT, such as
being part of the chair chain in the Committee on Laboratories.
She was an author of the recent AAPT White Paper “Increase
Investment in Accessible Physics Labs: A Call to Action for
the Physics Education Community.” This major whitepaper
was recently endorsed by the AAPT Board of Directors.
Herne has been appointed to represent AAPT on AIP’s
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, Belonging, and Accessibility(DEIBA) strategic Framework Work Group. The purpose
of the group is to offer all AIP Member Societies the
opportunity to assist with the development of the DEIBA
Strategic Plan. Member Societies will inform the process
by providing input on the intended strategies for imple-
mentation and feedback on various components of the
plan.
Herne serves on the SEA Change Professional
Association Assessment Team, as Regional Director, NY
State region for the Advanced Laboratory Physics
Association, and has given many contributed and invited
talks at our meetings.
One new fellow of AAPT was announced in the Summer
2023 meeting:
Lin Ding , University of Ohio, Columbus, Ohio
Information on Alice Flarend, the recipient of the 2023
Paul W. Zitzewitz Excellence in K–12 Teaching Award,
appears in The Physics Teacher.
578 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 8, August 2023 Awards 578 04 October 2023 22:54:21
