
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| APRIL 01 2023
A charge analysis of non-invasive electrical brain
stimulation 
Maurice M. Klee  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 264–277 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0085625
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Isolation and molecular detection of Salmonella from broiler chickens in Baghdad city
AIP Conf. Proc.  (September 2023)
The sum rule for spectroscopic factors in the seniority scheme of identical particles
J. Math. Phys.  (January 1987) 04 October 2023 22:51:11
A charge analysis of non-invasive electrical brain stimulation
Maurice M. Kleea)
National Institutes of Health (retired), Bethesda, Maryland 20892
(Received 18 January 2022; accepted 6 December 2022)
The brain is an electric organ. As such, for well over a hundred years, physicists, engineers,
biologists, and physicians have used electromagnetic theory to try to understand how the brainworks and to diagnose and treat disease. The ﬁeld of electro-neuroscience is immense with
thousands of papers being published each year. In this paper, we provide physics students with an
introduction to the ﬁeld using a conventional model of the head that employs four concentric
spheres having different conductivities to represent the scalp, skull, cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), and
the brain itself. To ground the discussion, we use the speciﬁc case of non-invasive DC electricalstimulation of the brain through electrodes applied to the surface of the scalp, a procedure known
as transcranial DC stimulation or tDCS. Currently, tDCS is under clinical investigation for such
diseases as depression, anxiety, and chronic pain as well as to enhance the performance of athletesand the training of ﬁghter pilots. We solve the corresponding physics problem from a charge
perspective and explain why the charge distributions look the way they do using what we call the
“sensing pixel” technique. This paper can introduce students to the ways in which electromagnetictheory is being applied to problems in neuroscience; in this case, the problem of how to non-
invasively stimulate the brain to treat disease or improve performance.
#2023 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0085625
I. INTRODUCTION
Motivating students to engage with electromagnetic theory
has been and continues to be a challenge for physics teach-ers.
1Fortunately, electromagnetic theory is today at the heart
of neuroscience. It is used both to interpret electrical signalsrecorded from the brain such as the electroencephalogram
(EEG) and to understand the effects on the brain of the elec-
trical stimulation used in the treatment of such diseases asdepression, anxiety, and chronic pain. The latter problem ofunderstanding the effects of electrical stimulation on thebrain will be our focus here.
Not only is brain electricity something that students will
hear about in the news throughout their lives, it is intrinsi-cally interesting because it relates to how our bodies work.As it turns out, our brains are wired so that the default modeis to think about ourselves.
2Giving students the opportunity
to do that academically in a physics class can only be good.
The brain with all its details is, of course, too complicated
for a student’s ﬁrst look into brain electricity (see, for exam-ple, Fig. 1(a)). In this paper, we use a well-established elec-
trical model for the brain: A set of concentric spheres havingdifferent electrical conductivities that represent a scalp (skin)layer, a skull (bone) layer, a cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) layer,and a central brain (Fig. 1(b)).
3–10For context, the concentric
sphere model was the ﬁrst model used by psychologists to
interpret electroencephalograms and is still used as a com-parator for more accurate models.
11Hence, having studied
the sphere model, physics students can walk across campusto the psychology department and have a starting point for aconversation. There they are likely to ﬁnd that psychologistsand others working on electrical brain stimulation are well-versed in modeling since grant applications to fund suchwork, e.g., to the NIH’s National Institute of Mental Health,often include modeling results.
12
With the concentric sphere model under their belts, stu-
dents can move on to more complicated models wheredetails of the actual geometry of the brain are included such
as the folding pattern of the cerebral cortex (gray matter)
where the bodies of neurons are located, the nerve ﬁbertracks (white matter) upon which action potentials travel
between neurons, the cavities (ventricles) that lie deep in the
brain and are ﬁlled with cerebrospinal ﬂuid, and the collec-tions of nerve cells (basal ganglia) that lie at the base of thebrain and serve as relays for nerve ﬁbers going to (afferents)
and coming from (efferents) the cerebral cortex. In addition
to modeling the brain’s geometry more accurately, advancedmodels, such as that of Ref. 13, address the effects of aniso-
tropic conductivities, the skull’s compact and spongy bone,
and the fact that besides the cerebral cortex, a human headincludes a person’s cerebellum, eyes, and brain stem, and is
supported by neck muscles and the vertebrae of the spinal
column.
The brain’s most important cell type is, of course, the neu-
ron (Fig. 2) with its cell body, dendritic tree for receiving
inputs from other neurons through synapses (both chemical
and electrical), and its nerve ﬁber (axon) for sending outputs(action potentials) to other neurons and to effectors such as
muscles. The billions of neurons and trillions of connections
through synapses provide the brain with its dynamic behav-ior. The dynamics of groups of neurons is itself the subjectof extensive modeling (see, for example, Ref. 14).
More than 100 years ago, Ram /C19on y Cajal, the 1906 recipi-
ent of the Nobel Prize for Medicine, studied the organization
of neurons within the brain and gave us drawings of the typeshown in Fig. 3. Even these drawings are highly simpliﬁed
compared to the actual structure of the brain since they show
the volumes between cells as empty space where in factthose volumes are ﬁlled with even more neurons and with
supporting cells and structures, e.g., glial cells and blood
vessels, in a seemingly chaotic arrangement as revealed inelectron micrographs.
15Today’s models of brain electricity
have a long way to go to reach these levels of detail. To aid
in the journey, a variety of computer programs for solving
264 Am. J. Phys. 91(4), April 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 264 04 October 2023 22:51:11
the relevant electromagnetic ﬁeld problems have been devel-
oped, many of which are open source. Table Isets forth
examples of programs that have been used to study electrical
brain stimulation.16
The charge distributions presented herein were calculated
using the technique the author previously published in thisjournal (Ref. 26) as extended below in Sec. IIto include
interfaces between conductors having different conductivi-ties such as the interfaces between the scalp, skull, CSF, andbrain spheres of Fig. 1(b). The technique employs calcula-
tion cells of the type shown in Fig. 4. In the model, these cal-
culation cells sense electric ﬁelds at their faces. Thecalculation cells are, thus, referred to as “sensing pixels.”
As will be discussed and illustrated below, sensing pixels
provide a mechanism for understanding why a charge distri-bution for a particular geometry and set of conductivitieslooks the way it does. As will be shown in Sec. III, charge
accumulation at a particular location can be understood bysimply asking the question “what would a sensing pixel atthe location sense” or more precisely, what electric ﬁeldsfrom what neighboring charges would the sensing pixelsense most strongly. In Sec. III, using these questions from
physics, we explore the clinical question: “What is the effec-tiveness of transcranial electrical stimulation for differentstimulation setups?”
In addition to calculations performed using the sensing
pixel technique, calculations were also performed using theﬁrst of the programs of Table I, i.e., the
MATLABVRprogramsdeveloped by Professor Sergey N. Makarov and colleagues
at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute and the Athinoula A.Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging at the
Massachusetts General Hospital. Like the sensing pixel tech-
nique, the Makarov code calculates charge distributionsdirectly rather than ﬁrst calculating a potential distribution
and then converting it into a charge distribution by comput-
ing the change in the normal electric ﬁeld that occurs at aninterface between media of different conductivities (see Ref.
27and Eqs. (8)and(9)below).
Downloads of the Makarov software
28include examples
that employ detailed head geometries derived from MRIscans such as those available online through the NIH’s
Human Connectome Project.
29The Makarov code has been
optimized for fast execution with reasonable storage require-ments and thus can be a good place to start for students inter-
ested in further study of brain electricity from a charge
perspective. Whether one uses the sensing pixel technique,
the Makarov software, one of the other programs of Table I,
or some other approach, once the distribution is in hand, the“what would a sensing pixel sense” question can be brought
to bear to ﬁgure out what caused the distribution to look the
way it does.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Sec. II, we present the sensing pixel technique. In Sec. III,
we set out and solve a representative brain electricity prob-
lem; namely, we explore where charges accumulate whenDC electrical current is applied to the brain through surface
electrodes on the scalp in the procedure known as transcra-
nial DC stimulation (tDCS). The details of the method used
Fig. 2. A typical neuron having dendrites that receive inputs from other neu-
rons that are summed at the neuron’s axon hillock to trigger action potentials
that travel along the neuron’s axon (shown myelinated in this ﬁgure) to pre-
synaptic terminals that release neurotransmitters that act on other neurons or
effectors such as muscle cells. Drawing by Casey Henley, Foundations of
Neuroscience (Michigan State University Libraries, East Lansing, Michigan
2021). Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial
Share-Alike (CC-BY-NC-SA) 4.0 International License.
Fig. 3. Drawings from an 1899 book by Ram /C19on y Cajal entitled
Comparative Study of the Sensory Areas of the Human Cortex , showing (left
to right) the arrangements of neurons in the visual cortex of an adult, the
motor cortex of an adult, and the cortex of infant. User: Looie496 created
ﬁle; Santiago Ram /C19on y Cajal created artwork; public domain via Wikimedia
Commons.
Fig. 1. Cross sections of (a) a human head; and (b) a four concentric sphere
model for same. Human head drawing adapted from: Pearson Scott
Foresman, Public Domain, via Wikimedia Commons.
265 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 265 04 October 2023 22:51:11
to calculate charge and potential distributions for this prob-
lem using the sensing pixel technique are set forth at the endof Sec. III. We conclude in Sec. IVwith a summary of the
types of diseases to which tDCS has been applied to give stu-dents a sense of the breadth of real-world problems in whichbrain electricity plays a role.
Before turning to the body of the paper, we note that from
a historical perspective, the calculation of charge distribu-tions, as we do here, is a relatively recent phenomenonreaching back to around the middle of the twentieth century
when in 1948 Professor Arnold Sommerfeld published the
charge distribution on a straight wire carrying a steady cur-rent.
30Charge distributions as a central theme for teaching
electromagnetic theory are even more recent, the ﬁrstedition of Professors Ruth W. Chabay’s and Bruce A.Sherwood’s innovative text not appearing until 1995.
31
Instead of charge distributions, potential distributions havebeen the norm.
This potential-centric approach can be traced back to the
nineteenth century when Maxwell (1831–1879) unequivo-cally taught that, in practice, potentials, not charges, are the
way to solve electromagnetic problems. In his famous A
Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism , Maxwell described
the potential approach as the “inverse method” and attributedits success to the work of such mathematical giants as Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749–1827), Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss(1777–1855), Sim /C19eon Denis Poisson (1781–1840), and
George Green (1793–1841), who in 1828 ﬁrst coined theword “potential.”
32Maxwell contrasted the “inverse meth-
od” with the “direct method” where one starts with a chargedistribution and then uses the charge distribution to calculate
a potential distribution (the charge-ﬁrst approach). In the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries when Maxwell, Laplace,Gauss, Poisson, and Green did their work, the direct methodwas of little practical use, as Maxwell made clear in theTreatise (emphasis added):
In the direct method the potential is calculated
from the distribution of electricity by a process ofintegration….In the inverse method the partialdifferential equations are…given, and we have to
find the potential and the distribution of electricity.
It isonly in problems in which the distribution of
electricity is given that the direct method can be
used. When we have to find the distribution on a
conductor we must make use of the inverse
method.
33
Fast forward 150 years. Today, we are not limited to
potential-ﬁrst approaches, but using computers can take a
direct, charge-ﬁrst approach. The sensing pixel technique
that we will be using here is one example of that approach
and, as we will see, it can help students break down the com-
plicated world of brain science into bite-size pieces through
its “what would a sensing pixel sense” question.
II. THE SENSING PIXEL TECHNIQUE
A. Overview
The sensing pixel technique is a method for calculating
and interpreting the charge distribution on the surface of a
conductor during current ﬂow through the conductor (Ref.
26). The technique uses a set of three-dimensional calcula-
tion cells (“pixels”) that cover the conductor’s surface and
contain internal charge. The pixels have two major faces that
are parallel to one another and a set of side faces (e.g., three
side faces in the case of triangular pixels) which extend
between the major faces.
It is important to note that sensing pixels are not actually
present on the interfaces between media of different conduc-
tivities but are virtual constructs used to calculate and inter-
pret charge distributions. Students can be asked to imagine
sensing pixels covering the interfaces and further imagine
that the sensing pixels are able to sense charges in their sur-roundings with some charges being sensed more strongly
than others. Students can complete the exercise by applying
this “sensing” ability to discuss why some sensing pixels
accumulate charge of one sign, others accumulate charge ofTable I. Brain stimulation modeling software.
Calculation Open Representative
Software Originator MethodaSource Citation
BEM-FMM Worcester Poly. Mass. General BEM YesbRef.10
SPHERE City University of New York (CUNY) Analytic Yes Ref. 9
ROAST City University of New York (CUNY) FEM YesbRef.17
COMETS2 Hanyang University FEM YesbRef.18
SimNBIS DRCMR, TUD, MPIcFEM Yes Ref. 19
DUNEuro WWU M €unsterdFEM Yes Ref. 20
SciRun CIBCeFEM Yes Ref. 21
HD-ExploreTMHD-TargetsTMSoterix Medical FEM No Ref. 22
NEVRelectric ﬁeld analytics Neuroelectrics FEM No Ref. 23
COMSOL MultiphysicsVRCOMSOL FEM No Ref. 24
AbaqusVRSimulia FEM No Ref. 25
ANSYSVRMaxwellVRANSYS FEM No Ref. 10
aBEM—boundary element method for charge distribution; FEM—ﬁnite element method.
bUses MATLABVR, which is widely available but not open source.
cDanish Research Centre for Magnetic Resonance; Technical University of Denmark; Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics.
dWestf €alische Wilhelms-Universit €at M€unster.
eCenter for Integrative Biomedical Computing, Scientiﬁc Computing and Imaging Institute, University of Utah.
266 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 266 04 October 2023 22:51:11
the opposite sign, and still others hardly accumulate any
charge. They can use the analysis of the charge distributionsassociated with transcranial DC electrical stimulation dis-cussed below in Sec. IIIas a guide for their own analysis.
While sensing pixels provide a relatively simple construct
for modeling surface charge distributions, actual surfacecharges are very complex, especially for biological systemswhere molecules of various types (lipids, proteins, sugars,etc.) form the interfaces and the charge carriers are ions andlarger molecules, including neurotransmitters, which ebb andﬂow to and from the interface. In many cases, the interfacesare not even passive but have embedded proteins that
actively move molecules from one side of the interface tothe other consuming energy in the process. While all bioelec-tricity models face these challenges, in terms of mathemati-cal complexity, a sensing pixel analysis may be moreintuitive to some students than, for example, a ﬁnite elementanalysis whose algorithms provide little insight into why thedistributions it calculates look the way they do.
B. The sensing pixel
Figures 4(a)and4(b)show a sensing pixel and the surface
of a sphere covered with sensing pixels. The major faces ofthe pixel are parallel to one another and separated by a smalldistance (exaggerated in Fig. 4(a)) so that the pixel has an
internal volume that can hold charge. In accordance with thesensing pixel technique, surface charge distributions are cal-culated by treating each pixel as a “sensor” that responds tothe electric ﬁeld at its conductive faces due to charges inother pixels and charges at applied current sources and sinks(collectively, the “external charges”). More particularly, thepixels respond to the normal components of the electric ﬁeldat their faces with the tangential components causing chargeto move along the interfaces but not causing charge to enteror leave the pixels.
Through a feedback process implemented as a series of
time steps or, more generally, iteration steps (see below), thepixels’ internal charges adjust themselves until, at steadystate, a balance is achieved at each pixel between the chargeﬂuxes at the pixel’s two conductive faces. Speciﬁcally, atsteady state, all the charge that enters through one conduc-tive face must leave through the other conductive face orelse the pixel will still have a changing internal charge andthus will not be at steady state. Note that the charge ﬂuxes atthe two faces only need to be balanced (equal in magnitudewith one being a ﬂow into the pixel and the other a ﬂow outof the pixel) and do not need to be zero except in the casewhere one of the media at the interface is non-conductive. Inthat case, the charge ﬂow at the non-conductive face is zero,and thus, the charge ﬂow at the conductive face must also bezero for the pixel to be at steady state.
Students can think of the process of reaching steady state
as a series of steps in which at each step, the pixels’ internalcharges are adjusted in response to the then-existing externalcharges. As shown in Fig. 4(a), each pixel has a higher con-
ductivity face and a lower conductivity face. A given pixelcan have one of four “sensing” relationships with externalcharge: The external charge can be positive and on the pix-el’s higher conductivity side, the external charge can be posi-tive and on the pixel’s lower conductivity side, the externalcharge can be negative and on the pixel’s higher conductivityside, and the external charge can be negative and on the pix-el’s lower conductivity side. Table IIsets forth the four cases
and the effect of the external charge on the pixel for eachcase.
34
In addition to the four cases of Table II, there is a ﬁfth possi-
ble relationship between an external charge and a sensing pixelin which the charge is in the plane of the pixel. As shown inRef.26, a pixel cannot sense co-planar charge and thus the ﬁfth
relationship has no effect on a pixel’s internal charge.
We work through Table II’s ﬁrst case and leave the other
three cases as exercises. The geometry for this case is that ofFig.4(c)with qtaken as positive; such a positive charge can
be charge at a source or in another pixel.
Fig. 4. (a) A “sensing pixel” having a higher conductivity face and a lower
conductivity face. (b) A spherical interface covered with a coarse mesh of
sensing pixels. (c) The sensing pixel “senses” a charge qbased on the pixel’s
solid angle Xas seen from the charge. Equations (2)and(3)below use the
solid angle of the pixel’s higher conductivity face designated as XShgh q
where the arrow in the subscript indicates that the charge qis looking at the
higher conductivity face Shgh.
267 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 267 04 October 2023 22:51:11
For our assumed pixel geometry, the electric ﬁeld distribu-
tion produced by an external charge is substantially identicalat the pixel’s two major faces since the faces are parallel,have the same shape, and are spaced close to one another.For case 1, the positive external charge ( þq) on the pixel’s
higher conductivity side will produce inﬂow to the pixel onthat side and outﬂow on the lower conductivity side. By deﬁ-nition, the conductivity on the higher conductivity side is
greater than the conductivity on the lower conductivity side.
Consequently, from Ohm’s law ( J¼rE), the inﬂow and
outﬂow of charge due to þqwill be out of balance with the
inﬂow being greater than the outﬂow.
This imbalance will cause positive charge to accumulate
in the pixel. The accumulated internal positive charge willproduce an electric ﬁeld distribution at the pixel’s higherconductivity face that opposes the ﬁeld due to þqand a dis-
tribution at the lower conductivity face that enhances theﬁeld due toþq. When the internal charge reaches a level
where the opposition at the higher conductivity face and theenhancement at the lower conductivity face are sufﬁcient toproduce charge inﬂows and outﬂows that are in balance, thesteady state will have been reached.
This balancing process takes place at all the pixels and
because the external charge for any given pixel includes thecharges in all the other pixels, reaching steady state becomesa feedback process in which the pixels interact with oneanother to balance each pixel’s inﬂow and outﬂow. Thesteady state is then that charge distribution for the set of pix-els that gives balanced charge ﬂux for each of the pixels.Students can visualize the process mechanistically as the
charge in each pixel “sensing” the charge in neighbors and
all the pixels cooperating with one another to make everypixel in balance.
C. The sensing pixel equations
To provide accurate results, the sensing pixel technique
calculates charge ﬂuxes using solid angles, speciﬁcally, the
solid angles of a given pixel as seen from each of the exter-nal charges (Fig. 4(c)). As is well known, the solid angle X
of a surface Sas seen from an observation point Ois given
by
X¼ð
S^r/C1^n
r2da; (1)
where ^ris a unit vector from the point Oto an element daof
S,ris the magnitude of the distance between Oandda, and
^nis the outward unit normal to Satda.
Solid angles automatically take into account the varia-
tion in the electric ﬁeld produced by a point charge atdifferent locations on the face of a sensing pixel. For pixels
that are near to one another, solid angles work much betterthan calculating charge ﬂuxes using just the electric ﬁeldat the center of a face (the center point method). Solid
angles for triangular pixels can be calculated with a mini-
mal number of computational steps using the algorithm ofRef. 35.
In Ref. 26, the conductor was assumed to be surrounded
by a non-conductor such as air, and thus, one of the pixel’smajor faces was treated as conductive and the other as non-conductive.
36In order to calculate charge distributions in the
brain, the requirement that one of the pixel’s major surfaces
is non-conductive needs to be relaxed since only the inter-face between the scalp and the air is of this type. We, there-fore, treat both of the pixel’s major faces as conductive withconductivities that are higher/lower relative to one another(r
hghandrlow).
We assume that the rhgh(rlow) face is in contact with the
higher (lower) conductivity medium and that charge reaches
the face by passing through the medium. The charge ﬂuxthrough the higher (lower) conductivity face, thus, dependson the value of r
hgh(rlow), which controls the ﬂow of charge
to the face. With regard to the internal structure, we assumethat the pixels are small both in terms of thickness and sur-
face area so that as seen from other pixels, the internal
charge can be considered as concentrated at the center of thepixel. Charge needs to be able to ﬂow between the faces inorder to pass between the conductive media. Thus, the inter-nal volume of the pixel needs to be conductive but the partic-ular value of its conductivity need not be speciﬁed. Rather,
the conductivity only needs to be ﬁnite so that the resistance
across the pixel and thus the potential drop produced by cur-rent passing through the pixel is insigniﬁcant for ourassumed very thin pixel.
In a typical application, we use the sensing pixel technique
to ﬁnd the steady-state charge q
ss
spin each sensing pixel when
the above-discussed “balancing” of charge ﬂuxes for all thepixels has been achieved. The mathematical details are given
in supplementary material A.37In the following, we provide
an explanation for each of the factors that affect the transferof charge in each time (iteration) step Dt. It should be noted
that at steady state, free charge can only exist on interfacesand, when used, at sources and sinks located within the bodyof a conductor (see Eqs. (4)–(7) ), since at any other location,
charge that is free to redistribute will rapidly decay based on
the medium’s time constant which for biological ﬂuids istypically in the nanosecond range.
38
We deﬁne the parameters: rdiff¼rhgh/C0rlow;rsum¼rhgh
þrlow; and Rgain=loss¼rdiff=rsum. In supplementary material
A,37we use these parameters and Coulomb’s law, Ohm’s
law and charge conservation to derive the following equa-
tions for: (i) the accumulation of charge ( qsp) in a sensing
pixel having two conductive faces during a stepDt¼t
nþ1/C0tn, and (ii) the steady state charge ( qss
sp) in the
pixel when the charge transfers are in balance
qspðtnþ1Þ¼ 1/C0Dtrsum
2e0/C18/C19
qspðtnÞ
/C0Dtrdiff
4pe0X
j6¼spqjðtnÞXShgh qj6DtIappl (2)
andTable II. Charge-pixel relationships.
Case 1 Positive charge on the pixel’s Seeks to make the pixel’s
higher conductivity side internal charge positive
Case 2 Positive charge on the pixel’s seeks to make the pixel’s
lower conductivity side internal charge negative
Case 3 Negative charge on the pixel’s Seeks to make the pixel’s
higher conductivity side internal charge negative
Case 4 Negative charge on the pixel’s Seeks to make the pixel’s
lower conductivity side internal charge positive
268 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 268 04 October 2023 22:51:11
qss
sp¼/C0Rgain=loss
2pX
j6¼spqss
jXShgh qj6ð2e0=rsumÞIappl:(3)
In these equations, XShgh qjis the solid angle (Fig. 4(c))o f
the pixel’s higher conductivity face Shghas seen from charge
qjwith the unit normal ( ^nhgh)t oShghpointing outward from
the face. Accordingly, from Eq. (1), charges on the higher
conductivity side of the pixel will have negative solid angles
and thus in view of the minus sign before the terms contain-ingX
Shgh qjin these equations, when those charges are posi-
tive, they will seek to move positive charge into the pixel
(Table II, case 1). Switching the sign of the charge or switch-
ing the side of the pixel on which the charge is located
results in the opposite effect (Table II, cases 2 and 3).
Switching both the sign and the side leads to the originaleffect (Table II, case 4).
Equation (2)embodies: (1) ﬂow of charge into or out of
the pixel’s faces due to the pixel’s own electric ﬁeld, (2)
ﬂow of charge into or out of the pixel’s faces due to the ﬁelds
of external charges, and (3) the direct introduction or
removal of charge from the interior of the pixel. Speciﬁcally,Eq.(2)’s ﬁrst term and, in particular, the negative portion of
the term is a self-term that reﬂects the change in the pixel’s
internal charge due to ﬂow of the internal charge out of thepixel during Dt. Outward ﬂow can occur through both of the
pixel’s major surfaces and thus the self-term depends on
r
sum¼rhghþrlow.
The second term in Eq. (2)reﬂects current ﬂow into or
out of the pixel during Dtdue to all of the other charges in
the system (the external charge). Thus, this term is the“what would a sensing pixel sense” term. The term depends
onr
diff¼rhgh/C0rlowsince current ﬂow through the pixel’s
lower conductivity face is always in the opposite directionfrom that through its higher conductivity face because the
outward normals for those faces point in opposite
directions.
The last term in Eq. (2)(and Eq. (3)) represents the intro-
duction of applied current ( I
appl) directly into a sensing pixel.
In the case of electrical brain stimulation, the applied currentcomes from an external source. In the most basic forms of
tDCS, the source is a small battery. Sensing pixels can also
be used to model biological cells in which case I
applcan rep-
resent electrochemical processes that move charged ions
across biological membranes.
Rather than being introduced into a sensing pixel located
on the surface of a conductor, the applied current can also be
introduced into the body of the conductor. From Eqs. (11)
and(12)of Ref. 26, the equations that govern the accumula-
tion of charge at an anode ( þIappl) and cathode (/C0IapplÞfor
that case areqanodðtnþ1Þ¼ 1/C0Dtranod
e0/C18/C19
qanodðtnÞþDtIappl (4)
and
qcathðtnþ1Þ¼ 1/C0Dtrcath
e0/C18/C19
qcathðtnÞ/C0DtIappl; (5)
where ranodandrcathare the conductivities of the media in
which the anode and cathode are located. In the terminology
of Ref. 26, the anode and cathode are each in a “category II”
calculation cell for which charge accumulation only dependson the local conductivity and I
appl, and not on charges exter-
nal to the calculation cell. The steady state charges in this
case are
qss
anod¼ranod
e0Iappl (6)
and
qss
cath¼rcath
e0Iappl: (7)
The parameter Rgain=loss¼rdiff=rsumin the ﬁrst term of
Eq.(3)combines the competing effects of rdiffandrsum,
with rdiffreﬂecting gain resulting from external charges and
rsumreﬂecting loss from outward ﬂow of internal charge.39
The closer Rgain=lossis to 1.0 (its maximum value), the greater
the net effect of external charges. High Rgain=lossvalues
require high rhgh=rlowratios, e.g., ratios above 20:1 to
achieve Rgain=lossvalues above 0.9. As shown in Table III, for
the representative conductivity values used here, the pixelsof the air-scalp, scalp-skull, skull-CSF, and CSF-brain inter-
faces have R
gain=lossvalues sufﬁciently high for the pixels to
interact strongly with external charge and, thus, are impor-tant to include in the brain model. Other interfaces having
lower ratios such as the gray matter/white matter interface
whose R
gain=lossratio is only 0.37,40can, at least in the ﬁrst
instance, be excluded from the analysis.
In practice, to perform a simulation, Eq. (2)is written for
each sensing pixel in the system using values of rsumand
rdiffappropriate for the interface on which the pixel is
located. When current is introduced/removed from the body
of one or more of the conductors using category II calcula-
tion cells as opposed to being introduced/removed fromsensing pixels at interfaces, this set of equations is combined
with one or more of Eqs. (4)and(5). Through a series of
steps, the system is moved forward from initial conditions,e.g., no charge anywhere in the system, to steady state,
Table III. Interface properties.
InterfaceRadius
(mm)r’s
(S/m) Rgain=loss ^nhghmaxjqss
spj
(elementary charges)
Two electrodes Five electrodes
Air-scalp 75 0.000 !0.465 1.00 Inward 4 :5/C21044:6/C2104
Scalp-skull 70 0.465 !0.010 0.96 Outward 1 :9/C21042:0/C2104
Skull-CSF 65 0.010 !1.650 0.99 Inward 1 :4/C21042:3/C2103
CSF-brain 60 1.650 !0.200 0.78 Outward 1 :5/C21021:4/C2102
269 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 269 04 October 2023 22:51:11
with the charge values for the prior step ( tn) being used to
calculate the charge values for the current step ( tnþ1).
The series of steps is the time path by which the system
reaches steady state when (1) the system’s dimensions are
sufﬁciently small so that the time required for light to cross
the system (the retardation effect) is much smaller than the
system’s time constant and (2) capacitive effects are small so
that each of the conductive media can be treated as having
the permittivity of free space ( e0). Biological systems and, in
particular, the brain satisfy the ﬁrst criterion, but not the sec-
ond since biological media are known to have signiﬁcantdielectric constants.41However, the steady state ﬁelds and
currents depend only on media conductivities and not on
dielectric constants and, thus, can be found using e0as the
value of e.42The charge distributions of Sec. IIIand the com-
parison of the sensing pixel technique with the Markarov
software of Ref. 28in supplementary material C and with
the analytic solution of Ref. 4in supplementary material D
use the e¼e0approach.37For this approach, Dtin the above
equations is an iteration step, not actual time.43The sensing
pixel technique can be extended to the case where e6¼e0,
but the analysis becomes more complicated and does not
change the steady state solution.
Before leaving the equations of the sensing pixel tech-
nique, it is of interest to note that the terms including Iapplin
Eqs. (2)–(7) can be used to make the “impressed current”
construct often used in making models of bioelectric ﬁelds
less “artiﬁcial and mysterious.”44Starting in the 1960s, a
concept took hold in the ﬁeld of bioelectricity that current,
rather than charge, is the originating source for the electric
ﬁelds produced by electrically active organs such as the brain
and the heart.
According to this concept, cells of the brain and the heart
generate electrical current densities and those current densi-ties are the underlying sources of the electrical potentials of
the electroencephalogram (EEG) and electrocardiogram
(ECG) that clinicians measure. See, for example, Refs.
45–47 where Plonsey introduces “an applied (impressed)
current density J
i” whose divergence is a volume current
source density/C0Iv, Malmivuo and Plonsey modify
Maxwell’s equations to include Ji(Jiin their notation), and
Nunez and Srinivasan while advocating the use of impressed
currents ( JSin their notation), acknowledge that “[t]he intro-
duction of this pseudo-current may, at ﬁrst, appear artiﬁcial
and mysterious.” They go on to say, that the use of pseudo-
currents “turns out to be useful,” but by then, students new to
the ﬁeld may be lost.
As a physicist, the late Professor G €unter Scharf of the
University of Zurich and colleagues “protested” that “a cur-
rent density cannot be the source of the electric potential. A
static electric ﬁeld must come from a charge density, a cur-rent density generates a magnetic ﬁeld…[and to say, other-
wise] makes ﬁctitious physics and abandons Maxwell’s
electrodynamics as ﬁrst principle.”48
The Iapplterms of Eqs. (2)–(7) show that where current
is applied, charge accumulates. Thus, both views, i.e., the
view that impressed currents are the source of biopoten-
tials and the view that charges are the source, can be seen
as correct provided it is understood that the impressed cur-rents of Plonsey, Malmivuo and Plonsey, and Nunez and
Srinivasan do not produce electric ﬁelds directly but only
indirectly through the localized charge accumulations they
produce.49III. ELECTRICAL STIMULATION FROM A
CHARGE PERSPECTIVE
A. Transcranial DC stimulation (tDCS)
The goal of studying brain electricity, whether from a
charge perspective or some other perspective, is, of course,
to diagnose and treat disease. To that end, electrical brain
stimulation is an active frontier in neuroscience. Novelexperimental techniques have been developed for applying
current to the brain and mapping its distribution. Notably
examples include the work of Grossman et al. , which
showed that the beat frequency produced by electrical stimu-
lation at two closely spaced frequencies can be used to con-
trol the depth within the brain at which neurons are
stimulated,50and that of V €or€oslakos et al. where the level of
applied current needed to affect the activity of brain circuits
was studied using, among other things, electrode arrays
implanted in human cadaver brains.51
Novel techniques for modeling electrical brain stimulation
are also under development including the sensing pixel tech-
nique. In this paper, we apply the technique to the represen-
tative problem of electrical current applied to the brain
through electrodes located on a patient’s scalp. Because the
current must pass through the skull (cranium) to reach the
brain, such stimulation is known as “transcranial” (across-
the-cranium) stimulation.
Various waveforms for transcranial stimulation have been
studied clinically including DC, AC, and random stimula-
tion.52Transcranial DC stimulation (tDCS) is most com-
monly used and is the type of stimulation we will examine
here. Clinical studies have shown that tDCS is therapeuti-
cally beneﬁcial for some patients, i.e., we know that it often
works. However, we are still largely in the dark as to how itworks.53Our goal here will be to provide a physics perspec-
tive for looking at the problem, speciﬁcally, a charge per-
spective since ultimately it must be charge that makes tDCS
work.
B. Choosing the number and arrangement of stimulating
electrodes
Two questions that always need to be addressed in design-
ing a tDCS protocol are: (1) how many electrodes to use;
and (2) where to put them.54The goal of tDCS is often to
achieve enhanced brain excitability in a selected portion of
the brain while limiting those portions where excitability is
reduced. As a general rule of thumb, enhanced brain excit-
ability is found in the region of the brain where positive cur-
rent is introduced into the brain (e.g., under the anode) and
reduced brain excitability is found where that current is
removed from the brain (e.g., under the cathode).55
As our pedagogical vehicle for illustrating the effects of
the number of electrodes and their locations, we will use the
two conﬁgurations for performing tDCS shown in Fig. 5,
which are representative of some of the conﬁgurations cur-
rently in clinical use.
The conﬁguration of Fig. 5(a)uses one anode (þIappl) and
one cathode (/C0Iappl), while that of Fig. 5(b)uses ﬁve electro-
des consisting of a central anode ( þIappl) surrounded by four
cathodes which divide up the return current equally ( /C01
4Iappl
each) and are equally spaced from the anode in a circle-like
pattern. In both cases, the electrodes are electrically con-
nected to a subject’s head using, for example, a saline
270 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 270 04 October 2023 22:51:11
solution or a conductive gel to reduce the electrode-scalp
resistance.
Electrode technology is itself a ﬁeld of active investiga-
tion. A comprehensive discussion of the types of phenomena
that can affect electrode impedance during electrical stimula-
tion can be found in the text Bioimpedance & Bioelectricity
Basics (Ref. 56, Chapter 7); representative approaches for
including electrode structure in models of electrical brain
stimulation can be found in Professor Makarov’s text (Ref.
39, Chapter 8) and in Ref. 6.
During a tDCS session, a controlled amount of current is
applied to the subject’s head using the electrodes for a treat-
ment period which begins with ramping up the current and
ends with ramping it down. Typical values are 1–2 mA for
the applied current, 20 min for the treatment period, and
ramp-up/ramp-down periods of 30 s, but other values arealso used. A controller, such as that shown in Fig. 5(a), will
have settings for each of these treatment parameters. Further
information regarding the equipment and procedures for per-
forming tDCS currently in use can be found in Ref. 57.
C. Calculating charge distributions for the two and five
electrode cases
Electrode conﬁgurations of the type shown in Fig. 5have
previously been modeled using the ﬁnite element method
(FEM) with the results reported in terms of electric ﬁeld
magnitudes and directions.7,58,59The ﬁelds have been well-
described but their origins less so. Speciﬁcally, the underly-
ing charge distributions which produce the ﬁelds have notbeen reported. Using the sensing pixel technique, we will
calculate the charge distributions and use them to provide
students with an introduction to the types of problems where
basic principles of electricity and magnetism are being used
in current research.
Table IIIsets forth the values used in the calculations for:
(1) the radii of the air-scalp, scalp-skull, skull-CSF, and
CSF-brain interfaces, and (2) the conductivities ( r’s) on the
opposing sides of those interfaces. The values for these
parameters are based on those previously used in concentric
sphere models of the brain.
7The table also sets forth the
directions of the normals at the higher conductivity sides of
the sensing pixels which cover the interfaces ( ^nhgh) and the
maximum magnitude of charge in a pixel for each interface
(maxjqss
spj) for an applied current of 1 mA. Unlike charge
densities that vary as 1 =r2with a change in scale, a chargedistribution expressed in terms of charge per pixel values is
invariant to a change in scale provided the geometric distri-bution of the pixels relative to one another and relative to thelocations of the sources and sinks remains the same.
26Thus,
for electrodes at the same relative locations, the max jqss
spj
values of Table IIIapply for sets of sphere radii both larger
and smaller than the set of the table.
The concentric sphere model with uniform conductivities
in each layer highly simpliﬁes the geometry and heterogene-ity of an actual brain. However, the model retains sufﬁcientdetail to illustrate such basic phenomena as the effects on thebrain of different electrode montages and the shunting ofcurrent away from the brain by the layers that lie betweenthe stimulating electrodes and the brain, speciﬁcally, thescalp and CSF layers. The model is, thus, a Goldilocks-typesolution to the challenge of introducing students to realworld problems where their knowledge of electromagnetictheory can be applied while lessening the risk that the mes-sage will become lost in the details.
Figure 6shows the results of the calculations, speciﬁcally,
the calculated charge distributions on the air-scalp, scalp-skull,skull-CSF, and CSF-brain interfaces for the two electrode andﬁve electrode cases, as well as the potential distributions (cal-
culated in Sec. III F) produced in the brain for the two cases.
The calculation parameters for the ﬁgure are discussed inSec.III G.
Charge and potential distributions of the type shown in
Fig.6can be used as a ﬁrst step in selecting electrode mon-
tages likely to achieve desired clinical results. For example,from Fig. 6, we can see that if stimulation having a wide spa-
tial distribution is desired, then a two electrode system couldbe chosen, while for a more focused effect, a ﬁve electrodeapproach may be better. Our goal, however, is not to makestudents into clinicians. Rather, it is to illustrate how thesensing pixel technique can help in understanding brain elec-tricity. To do so, we will analyze in detail one rather peculiaraspect of the charge distributions of Fig. 6. With that analysis
in hand, interested students can apply the sensing pixel tech-nique to other aspects of the Fig. 6charge distributions or
other charge distributions that may be of interest.
D. Explaining why the skull-CSF’s charge distribution is
different from the rest
The aspect of the charge distributions of Fig. 6that we
will explain using the sensing pixel technique is the factthat for both the two electrode and the ﬁve electrode cases,
Fig. 5. (Color online) Two electrode and ﬁve electrode tDCS conﬁgurations. Source: Soterix Medical, Inc.; Iappldesignations added.
271 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 271 04 October 2023 22:51:11
the charge distribution on the skull-CSF interface is the
reverse of the charge distributions on the other interfaces,
i.e., the charges on all of the other interfaces are positive
near anodes (þIappl) and negative near cathodes ( /C0Iapplor
/C01
4Iappl), while on the skull-CSF interface, they are negative
near anodes and positive near cathodes. We ask: Why does
this happen?
The answer starts at the anode and cathode pixels. The
geometry we are using to model the head has no corners,
edges, or closely spaced surfaces where feedback between
pixels can produce high levels of charge (see Ref. 26). As a
result, as detailed in supplementary material B,37the highest
charge magnitudes occur at the anode and cathode where the
current is applied and removed from the system.
As discussed in Sec. IIand summarized in Table II,i n
accordance with the sensing pixel technique, positive (nega-
tive) charges on the higher conductivity side of a sensing
pixel seek to load positive (negative) charges into the pixel
with the opposite effect for positive (negative) charges on
the lower conductivity side. In other words, a “source”
charge external to a “target” pixel seeks to make the targetpixel have the same sign charge as the source charge when
the source charge is on the target pixel’s higher conductivity
side and charge of the opposite sign when the source charge
is on the target pixel’s lower conductivity side. This “rule,”
along with the directions of ^nhghin Table III, is all that is
needed to explain qualitatively why positive/negative
charges accumulate in the sensing pixels near the anodes/
cathodes on the air-scalp, scalp-skull, and CSF-brain interfa-
ces, while just the opposite occurs on the skull-CSF
interface.
From the directions of ^nhghin Table III, we see that the
large charge levels of the anodes/cathodes are on the higher
conductivity sides of the pixels on the air-scalp, scalp-skull,
and CSF-brain interfaces. Consequently, from the above
rule, the large positive charges of the anodes seek to make
nearby pixels of the air-scalp, scalp-skull, and CSF-brain
interfaces positive (case 1 of Table II), and the large negative
charges of the cathodes seek to make their nearby pixels neg-
ative (case 3 of Table II). The signs for the charges on the
air-scalp, scalp-skull, and CSF-brain interfaces are, thus, as
shown in Fig. 6. For the skull-CSF interface, on the other
Fig. 6. (Color online) Charge and potential distributions for the two and ﬁve electrode cases. The charge distributions are looking down from above; t he poten-
tial distributions are in a plane passing through the brain’s center, the anode, and the cathode or two of the cathodes for the two and ﬁve electrode case s, respec-
tively. Blue: negative potentials and charges; red: positive potentials and charges; gray: the zero potential line and charge magnitudes near zero
(/C200:03 maxjqss
spjin Table III). Color scale applies to all charge distributions. For Iappl¼1 mA, the spacing between equipotential lines is 1 mV. Thus, for the
two electrode case, the equipotential lines extend from –6 mV to þ6 mV and for the ﬁve electrode case, from 0 mV to þ3 mV, the negative potentials within
the brain not reaching –1 mV for this case. To facilitate comparison, the same sphere diameter is used in all plots.
272 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 272 04 October 2023 22:51:11
hand, the large charge levels of the anodes/cathodes are on
the lower conductivity sides of the pixels on that interfaceand, thus, when those large charge levels are sensed by thosepixels, the charges in the skull-CSF pixels, as shown in Fig.6, end up having a sign opposite to that of the nearby ano-
des/cathodes (cases 2 and 4 of Table II).
Supplementary material B sets forth a more quantitative
explanation for the difference in the behavior of the skull-CSF interface compared to the other interfaces using theexpression for the steady state charge in a sensing pixel ofEq.(3).
37The bottom line is the same: Pixels on the air-
scalp, scalp-skull, and CSF-brain interfaces follow a straight-forward positive-near-positive and negative-near-negativeparadigm, while pixels on the skull-CSF interface follow apositive-near-negative and negative-near-positive paradigmwhich at ﬁrst glance appears counter-intuitive but which isreadily understood using a “what would a sensing pixelsense” analysis.
Although we have concentrated on the effects of anode/
cathode charges, as is evident from the ﬁrst term of Eq. (3),
all of the charges in the system contribute to the charge in agiven pixel. Often it will be straightforward to identify thepixels whose charges most inﬂuence the charge in a givenpixel and thus an analysis like that used above may be sufﬁ-cient. However, it can become challenging when some inﬂu-ential neighbors have charges of one sign and others of the
opposite sign, as in the case of the pixels on the CSF-brain
interface where the skull-CSF charges are the closest chargesand have a sign opposite to that of the other interfaces. Ascan be seen from the values of max jq
ss
spjfor the CSF-brain
interface given in Table III, the net effect of the charges in
other pixels on the pixels of this interface is very small sothat the charges on the CSF-brain interface are almost zero.Thus, computer calculations may be needed either initiallyor to conﬁrm a back-of-the-envelope prediction. In eithercase, the sensing pixel technique has a role to play, namely,to provide a “does it make sense” check on, and an explana-tion for, the results of the computer calculations.
E. Calculating the amount of current that passes through
the brain
Once calculated, a charge distribution can be used to cal-
culate various parameters of interest for the particular prob-lem being solved. We illustrate this for our tDCS problem bycalculating the amount of current that enters parts of thebrain and then leaves through other parts at steady state. InSec.III F, we make a further use of the calculated charge dis-
tribution to compute the steady state potential distributionwithin the brain plotted in the bottom row of Fig. 6.
We calculate the current that crosses into the brain through
the CSF-brain interface ( I
br csf) using the facts that: (1) at
interfaces between layers, the normal current density mustbe continuous for the charge at the interface to be at steadystate since if the normal current density on one side of theinterface were different from the normal current density onthe other side, the charge at the interface would still bechanging (increasing or decreasing) and not at steady state;and (2) the normal electric ﬁeld at the interface must be dis-continuous by an amount equal to ðR
freeþRboundÞ=e0,27
where Rfreeis the interfacial, free charge, surface density and
Rbound is the interfacial, polarization charge, surface density,
which for the e¼e0approach used herein is zero. We, thus,
can writercsfEcsf
n¼rbrEbr
n (8)
and
Ebr
n/C0Ecsf
n¼Rfree
e0; (9)
where the En’s are the normal components at the interface of
the electric ﬁelds in the CSF and brain. In these equations,
the normal has been taken as pointing into the brain. Solving
these equations for the normal inward current density at theCSF-brain interface, i.e., J
br
n¼rbrEbr
n, we have
Jbr
n¼rcsf/C1rbr
rcsf/C0rbr/C1Rfree
e0: (10)
Using our previously calculated values of qss
spfor the pixels
of the CSF-brain interface plotted in Fig. 6and the areas of
the pixels ( Asp) known from the discretization used to divide
the interface into pixels, we can immediately calculate
Rfree¼qss
sp=Aspfor each pixel and thus Jbr
nfrom Eq. (10).
Since rcsf>rbr, the Jbr
nvalues for pixels containing positive
charge will be positive and those with negative charge will
be negative. By adding up the Jbr
n/C1Aspvalues, i.e., the qss
sp
values, for just the positive pixels, and multiplying by
ðrcsf/C1rbrÞ=ððrcsf/C0rbrÞe0Þ, we arrive at our desired value
for the current entering the brain ( Ibr csf), the current leaving
the brain being of the same magnitude but ﬂowing outwardthrough the CSF-brain interface rather than inward.
Table IVshows the results of this process for the CSF-
brain interface, as well as for the scalp-skull and skull-CSF
interfaces for an applied current of 1 mA. As can be seen, for
the two electrode case, just 21% of the applied current reaches
the brain, with 56% being directly shunted between the anode
and cathode by the scalp layer without reaching any deeper
into the head, 1% being shunted by the low conductivity skull
layer, and 22% by the high conductivity CSF layer. The
amount of current entering the brain is even less for the ﬁve
electrode case with 82% of the applied current being shunted
through the scalp layer, 1% through the skull layer, and 12%
through the CSF layer, leaving a paltry 5% to do the work of
inﬂuencing the electrical activity of brain cells.
Similar high levels of shunting by a scalp layer or by a
combination of a scalp layer and a CSF layer were found for
a three-sphere concentric sphere model in Refs. 3and6and
for a four-sphere model in Ref. 8. High levels of shunting
were also found in Ref. 40for a realistic head model that
included scalp, skull, CSF, gray matter, white matter, eye,
muscle, and air compartments.
While the amount of current entering the brain can be
increased by increasing the level of applied current, safety con-
siderations and patient comfort come into play as the current
is increased. The typical upper limit for applied current is
2 mA, although higher levels have been used in some studies.60
Table IV. Inwardly transferred positive current.
I Two electrodes Five electrodes
(Iappl¼1:00 mA) (1 anode/1 cathode) (1 anode/4 cathodes)
Iskul sclp 0.44 mA 0.18 mA
Icsf skul 0.43 mA 0.17 mA
Ibr csf 0.21 mA 0.05 mA
273 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 273 04 October 2023 22:51:11
The values in Table IVare for an applied current of 1 mA so
there is room to increase the current level within the brain butit will still be a fraction of the current levels in other layers
especially the level in the scalp where the current can cause
tingling/itching sensations and localized reddening of the skin.
The values in Table IVare sensitive to the particular val-
ues used for the conductivities of the various layers, as wellas to their thicknesses. More generally, the amount of currentreaching the brain and its distribution once there depends onthe details of the head’s and the brain’s geometries. In terms
of clinical practice, these sensitivities have led to the belief
by many that the full beneﬁts of tDCS and other forms ofelectrical stimulation will only be achieved through person-alized medicine which takes into account the unique featuresof each person’s anatomy.
61
F. Calculating the potential distribution in the brain
In addition to calculating the amount of current entering
the brain, the calculated charge distributions can also be
used to calculate potential distributions within the brain. Thetransition from a charge distribution to a potential distribu-tion simply involves computing the combined (superim-posed) effects of the system’s charges at a set of ﬁeld points;i.e., we compute
Uðx;y;zÞ¼X
jqj
4pe0r; (11)
where ( x,y,z) is a ﬁeld point, qjis the jthcharge, and ris
the magnitude of the distance between qjand the ﬁeld point.
The electric ﬁeld distribution can also be obtained from the
charge distribution using superposition. In this case, we have
Eðx;y;zÞ¼X
jqj
4pe0r2^r; (12)
where ^ris a unit vector that points from qjto the (x,y,z) ﬁeld
point.
The bottom row of Fig. 6illustrates the use of Eq. (11)to
generate equipotential plots within the brain sphere for the
two and ﬁve electrode cases. The spacing between equipo-tential lines (1 mV for an applied current of 1 mA) is thesame in the two plots thus allowing a direct comparison ofthe potential distributions for the two cases. As discussed inRef. 58, the goal of the ﬁve electrode system is to produce
more focused effects on the brain. This is clearly seen in Fig.
6where the equipotential lines extend throughout the brain
for the two electrode case but are highly localized under theanode for the ﬁve electrode case. As acknowledged in Ref.58, focusing comes at the cost of overall weaker ﬁelds. This
is evident in Fig. 6where the ﬁelds for the ﬁve electrode
case are plainly much weaker than those for the two elec-
trode case. The weaker ﬁelds can be attributed to the greatershunting through the scalp layer for the ﬁve electrode casediscussed above in connection with Table IV.
G. Calculation parameters for Fig. 6
The charge and potential distributions of Fig. 6were cal-
culated using 5,120 triangular pixels for each of the air-
scalp, scalp-skull, skull-CSF, and CSF-brain interfaces for a
total of 20,480 pixels. To reduce storage requirements, solidangle calculations were performed for only the 500 nearestneighbors of each pixel. For more distant pixels, the fast
multipole method (FMM) of Ref. 62as applied to electrical
brain stimulation in Ref. 10was used along with global
charge conservation at the end of each step to compensatefor the coarser approximations for the ﬁelds acting at the pix-els provided by the FMM. The FMM precision was set at1/C210
/C05. Solid angles were calculated using the technique
of Ref. 35.
The anodes and cathodes were modeled as groups of pix-
els on the air-scalp interface sharing a common vertex andarranged as a polygon about the vertex with the applied cur-rent equally divided among the members of the group.Pixelization of a spherical surface using triangles producesboth pentagon and hexagon groupings of pixels (see Fig.4(b)). Consequently, depending on their locations on the air-
scalp interface, the electrodes were either composed of ﬁve
or six pixels and had somewhat different areas. Speciﬁcally,
each of the anode and cathode electrodes for the two elec-trode case had six pixels and an area of 0.77 cm
2; the anode
for the ﬁve electrode case had six pixels and an area of0.83 cm2; and two of the cathodes for the ﬁve electrode case
had six pixels and two had ﬁve pixels, with the six pixel elec-trodes each having an area of 0.87 cm2and each of the ﬁve
pixel electrodes having an area of 0.64 cm2.
For the two electrode case, the polar angle on the scalp of
each of the anode and cathode vertices was 28/C14with azi-
muthal angles of 0/C14and 180/C14. For the ﬁve electrode case, the
anode was located on the vertical axis and the same 28/C14polar
angle was used for each of the cathode vertices with azi-muthal angles of 0
/C14,9 0/C14, 180/C14, and 270/C14. In practice, disc
electrodes of the type modeled here are routinely used withﬁve electrode montages but less so with two electrode mon-tages where the applied current is often spread out over anarea of the scalp using square or rectangular, saline-soaked,conductive pads.
An iteration step on the order of ten percent of the sys-
tem’s smallest e
0=rratio was found to work successfully. In
the concentric sphere model for a human head of Fig. 1(b),
the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) has the highest conductivityand thus the smallest ratio, i.e., 5 :4/C210
/C012for the rvalue
of 1.65 S/m for the CSF of Table III, and thus, a step of
5:4/C210/C013was used in the calculations. Constant anodal
and cathodal currents were introduced into the electrode pix-els starting at t¼0 and continuing thereafter. In approxi-
mately 2,500 steps, the system reached its steady state.
The charge distributions of Fig. 6are normalized distribu-
tions obtained by dividing the charge in each pixel by thevalue of maxjq
ss
spjof Table IIIfor the interface on which the
pixel is located. In this way, the large differences in magni-
tudes for the four interfaces does not obscure the differences
in their distributions as would occur for global normalizationusing the maxjq
ss
spjvalue for the air-scalp interface. As a
result of the normalization, the single color bar above thehorizontal line in Fig. 6applies to all of the charge distribu-
tions. We note that charge densities can be obtained from thecharge per pixel values plotted in Fig. 6by simply dividing
by pixel areas, the resulting distributions on the interfacesbeing visually the same.
The potential distributions of the last row of Fig. 6were
calculated using Eq. (11)along with the technique discussed
in Sec. 4.2.4 of Makarov et al. (Ref. 39) to deal with the sin-
gularities in the potentials that occur as one approaches apixel’s centroid. For an applied current of 1 mA, the magni-tudes of the electric ﬁeld distributions corresponding to these
274 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 274 04 October 2023 22:51:11
potential distributions are on the order of 0.2 mV/mm for the
two electrode case where, as shown in Fig. 6, the potential
range is about 12 mV and less for the ﬁve electrode case
where the potential range is about 3 mV.
Validation of the sensing pixel technique was performed
both qualitatively and quantitatively. A qualitative compari-son was performed using the two-electrode, four-layer, con-
centric sphere model of Sec. 3.2 of Ref. 10. Charge
distributions for this problem were calculated using the opensource code of Ref. 28. The same sphere radii (92, 86, 80,
and 78 mm), electrode locations (a polar angle of 45
/C14for
each of the anode and cathode), and media conductivities(0.43, 0.01, 1.79, and 0.33 S/m) were used as in Ref. 10. The
calculated charge distributions are shown in supplementary
material C.
37These charge distributions follow the same pat-
terns as in Fig. 6. As was demonstrated in Sec. III, the pat-
terns are readily understood using the “what would a sensing
pixel sense” question.
The sensing pixel technique was also validated quantita-
tively using the analytic solution of Ref. 4for the problem of
polar stimulation of a three sphere model for a human head
(scalp, skull, brain). Speciﬁcally, the electric ﬁeld at the cen-
ter of the brain was calculated by applying Eq. (12) to a
charge distribution calculated using the sensing pixel tech-nique with the same pixel density as in Fig. 6. The same
sphere radii and conductivity values were used as in Ref. 4.
The numerically calculated electric ﬁeld was then multipliedby Ref. 4’s brain conductivity, i.e., 0.450 S/m, to give a cur-
rent density value of 0.0375 A/m
2. The analytic current den-
sity of Eq. (30) of Ref. 4was 0.0370 A/m2, a difference of
1.2%. The analytic and numerical solutions can be expectedto differ since the analytic solution assumes that the anode
and cathode are point sources, while in the numerical calcu-
lations, they each had an area of 1.25 cm
2. The code used for
the quantitative validation is set forth in supplementary
material D. The supplementary materials also include a
MATLABVRscript for the code.37
H. Student project
While some students may be motivated to acquire one of
the programs of Table Iand use the program to study the
electrical and geometric parameters that affect brain stimula-
tion, other students may ﬁnd a less ambitious project more
approachable. Figure 7illustrates a resistor network that canbe used for this purpose. In this model, the scalp, skull, CSF,
and brain layers are represented by sets of resistors labeled1–4. The resistors are arranged so that in each layer, the cur-
rent can ﬂow both tangentially and radially. The source and
sink are labeled 5 and 6.
The model is purely qualitative. Nonetheless, it can be
used to examine trends produced by, for example, changes insource and sink locations and/or the conductivities (resistan-
ces) of the various layers. Also, students can easily imple-
ment the model using the LTspice
VRprogram which Analog
Devices, Inc. distribute at no charge at its website. To getstudents started, an LTspice
VRscript for the Fig. 7circuit is
included in the supplementary material.37
IV. CONCLUSION
This introduction to brain electricity merely scratches the
surface of the on-going efforts to understand the electrical
behavior of the brain and to use that understanding to treat
disease. As a benchmark, for tDCS alone, a 2016 reviewlisted over three hundred references relating to the applica-tion of the technique to pain, depression, post-stroke rehabil-
itation, dystonia, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, dementia,
schizophrenia, autism, and attention disorders, as well as tosuch other clinical challenges as Parkinson’s disease, cere-bral palsy, primary progressive aphasia, consciousness disor-
ders, Alzheimer’s disease, tinnitus, addiction, and craving.
63
Since that time, hundreds of additional references relating to
potential uses of tDCS to treat disease have been pub-lished.64In addition to its use in connection with diseases,
transcranial electrical stimulation has also been used to
enhance the performance of healthy subjects, e.g., athletes,and to speed up the training of ﬁghter pilots.65tDCS is an
example of a “forward” problem where the stimulationparameters are under the control of the modeler and the
question being asked is how will the brain respond to current
applied using those parameters. The brain’s neurons them-selves generate electrical currents which produce the mad-deningly small voltages of the electroencephalogram (EEG)
at the surface of the scalp (in the microvolt range). The phys-
ics problem of determining the locations, magnitudes, andorientations of the sources within the brain that producethose small voltages is known as the “inverse” problem and
is acknowledged to be even more challenging than the for-
ward problem.
66
More challenges arise when one drops down from the
macro scale to the more micro scale of individual cells. Thereone ﬁnds the complex electrical behavior of cell membranes
including their pores that use charged proteins to control the
passage of ions between extracellular and intracellular mediaand thereby generate excitatory and inhibitory synapticpotentials and ultimately action potentials. Linking the activi-
ties of individual cells and the gross potentials measured
experimentally are the brain circuits, including circuits wheregroups of neurons coordinate their electrical activities to pro-duce rhythmic potentials, observable in electroencephalo-
grams, whose frequencies change with different levels of
brain activity, e.g., between waking and sleeping.
67Adding
all these problems up, it is evident that there is no shortage ofresearch problems for students to choose from.
Commercially, tDCS is just one part of a much larger
ﬁeld recently given the moniker “electroceuticals.” In 2019,
it was estimated to be a $23 billion industry projected togrow to more than $60 billion by 2029.
68Many have
 Fig. 7. Resistor network for modeling tDCS.
275 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 275 04 October 2023 22:51:11
proclaimed that we are now in the “golden age of neuro-
science.” Necessarily, a thorough understanding of electro-magnetic theory will be needed as we progress through that
age since at bottom the brain is an electric organ. The basic
physics problem that we have solved here can serve as astarting point for helping interested students engage withthis exciting age.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author thanks the anonymous referees for their
valuable comments and suggestions that helped improve themanuscript.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has patents and applications relating to electro-
physiology and neural activity.
a)Electronic mail: mmk@mauriceklee.com, ORCID: 0000-0001-5703-
543X.
1B. Parks, “Research-inspired problems for electricity and magnetism,”
Am. J. Phys. 74(4), 351–354 (2006).
2M. L. Meyer and M. D. Lieberman, “Why people are always thinking
about themselves: Medial prefrontal cortex activity during rest primes
self-referential processing,” J. Cognitive Neurosci. 30(5), 714–721 (2018).
3S. Rush and D. Driscoll, “Current distribution in the brain from surface
electrodes,” Anesth. Analg. 47(6), 717–723 (1968).
4S. Rush and D. Driscoll, “EEG electrode sensitivity—An application of
reciprocity,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 16(1), 15–22 (1969).
5M. Ferdjallah et al. , “Potential and current density distributions of cranial
electrotherapy stimulation (CES) in a four-concentric-spheres model,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 43(9), 939–943 (1996).
6P. Miranda et al. , “Modeling the current distribution during transcranial
direct current stimulation,” Clin. Neurophysiol. 117(7), 1623–1629
(2006).
7A. Datta et al. , “Transcranial current stimulation focality using disc and
ring electrode conﬁgurations: FEM analysis,” J. Neural Eng. 5(2),
163–174 (2008).
8P. Faria et al. , “A ﬁnite element analysis of the effect of electrode area and
inter-electrode distance on the spatial distribution of the current density in
tDCS,” J. Neural Eng. 8(6), 066017 (2011).
9J. Dmochowski et al. , “The point spread function of the human head and
its implications for transcranial current stimulation,” Phys. Med. Biol.
57(20), 6459–6477 (2012).
10S. Makarov et al. , “Boundary element fast multipole method for modeling
electrical brain stimulation with voltage and current electrodes,” J. Neural
Eng. 18(4), 0460d4 (2021).
11S. Conte and J. Richards, “The inﬂuence of the head model conductor on
the source localization of auditory evoked potentials,” Brain Topogr.
34(6), 793–812 (2021).
12M. Bikson et al. , “Rigor and reproducibility in research with transcranial
electrical stimulation: An NIMH-sponsored workshop,” Brain Stimulation
11(3), 465–480 (2018).
13S. Rampersad et al. , “Simulating transcranial direct current stimulation
with a detailed anisotropic human head model,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabilitation Eng. 22(3), 441–452 (2014).
14N. Carnevale and M. Hines, The Neuron Book (Cambridge U. P.,
Cambridge, 2006).
15P. Nahirney and M. Tremblay, “Brain ultrastructure: Putting the piecestogether,” Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 9, 629503 (2021).
16The software packages of Table Iare for the calculation of potentials,
ﬁelds, and current ﬂows associated with electrical brain stimulation. Avariety of software packages are also available for analyzing recordings of
the electric and magnetic ﬁelds produced by brain activity, i.e., electroen-
cephalograms (EEGs) and magnetoencephalograms (MEGs), including
EEGLab, MNE, Brainstorm, and FieldTrip, all of which are open source.
17Y. Huang et al. , “Realistic volumetric-approach to simulate transcranial
electric stimulation-ROAST—A fully automated open-source pipeline,”
J. Neural Eng. 16(5), 056006 (2019).18C. Lee et al. , “COMETS2: An advanced MATLAB toolbox for the numer-
ical analysis of electric ﬁelds generated by transcranial direct current stim-
ulation,” J. Neurosci. Methods 277, 56–62 (2017).
19G. Saturnino et al. , “SimNIBS 2.1: A comprehensive pipeline for individu-
alized electric ﬁeld modelling for transcranial brain stimulation,” in Brain
and Human Body Modeling: Computational Human Modeling at EMBC
2018, edited by S. Makarov et al. (Springer Nature Switzerland AG,
Cham, Switzerland, 2019), Chap. 1, pp. 3–25.
20S. Schrader et al. , “DUNEuro—A software toolbox for forward modeling
in bioelectromagnetism,” PloS One 16(6), e0252431 (2021).
21M. Dannhauer and S. Frisby, “BrainStimulator: A SCIRun5-based toolkit for
modeling of transcranial electromagnetic stimulation,” <https://www.sci.
utah.edu/images/software/SCIRun/BrainStimulatorTutorial.pdf >, accessed
on July 1, 2022.
22J. Dmochowski et al. , “Optimized multi-electrode stimulation increases
focality and intensity at target,” J. Neural Eng. 8(4), 046011 (2011).
23P. Miranda et al. , “The electric ﬁeld in the cortex during transcranial cur-
rent stimulation,” Neuroimage 70, 48–58 (2013).
24O. Seibt et al. , “Computational ﬁnite element method (FEM) forward
modeling workﬂow for transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) cur-rent ﬂow on MRI-derived head: Simpleware and COMSOL Multiphysics
tutorial,” preprint bioRxiv 704940 (2019).
25Y. Huang et al. , “Measurements and models of electric ﬁelds in the in vivo
human brain during transcranial electric stimulation,” eLife 6, e18834
(2017).
26M. Klee, “Surface charges from a sensing pixel perspective,” Am. J. Phys.
88(8), 649–660 (2020).
27M. Zahn, Electromagnetic Field Theory: A Problem Solving Approach
(Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 1979), p. 166.
28Computer code for Ref. 10can be found at https://tmscorelab.github.io/
EEG_MEG-Modeling-Website/ andwww.dropbox.com/sh/gf2jpx5gi0oso8m/
AADed5hdZXZExszPb6Od2slva?dl .
29D. van Essen et al. , “The WU-Minn human connectome project: An over-
view,” NeuroImage 80, 62–79 (2013); J. Elam et al. , “The human connec-
tome project: A retrospective,” ibid.244, 118543 (2021).
30A. Sommerfeld, Electrodynamics (Academic, New York, 1952), pp.
125–130; ﬁrst published as Elektrodynamik – Vorlesungen €uber
Theoretische Physik, Band 3 (Dietrich’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung,
Wiesbaden, 1948).
31R. W. Chabay and B. A. Sherwood, Electric and Magnetic Interactions
(Wiley, New York, 1995).
32George Green, An Essay on the Application of mathematical Analysis to
the theories of Electricity and Magnetism (T. Wheelhouse, Nottingham,
England, 1828).
33James Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism , 3rd ed.
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1891), Vol. I, pp. ix, 123.
34In Table II, we refer to the external charge “seeking to make” a pixel’s
internal charge positive or negative, rather than simply saying that theexternal charge “makes” the internal charge positive or negative, because
through the interplay of all of the charges of the system with the pixel, the
charge in a pixel is not merely that which an individual external chargewould produce if acting alone, but depends on the net effect of all of theexternal charges. Thus, while an individual external charge seeks to makethe internal charge positive or negative, it does not necessarily achieve
that result because the effects of other charges in the system may be stron-
ger and cause the internal charge to have the opposite polarity.
35A. van Oosterom and J. Strackee, “The solid angle of a plane triangle,”
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2, 125–126 (1983).
36In Ref. 26, the conductor was assumed to be homogeneous, isotropic, and
non-polarizable with a conductivity that did not vary with time. It was fur-
ther assumed that the Drude model applied to the conductor and that
inductive effects are insigniﬁcant. The same simplifying assumptions aremade here for each of the head’s conductive layers.
37See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0085625 for supplementary materials A–D, where A derives
Eqs. (2) and (3), B applies Eq. (3) to the skull–CSF interface, C contains aqualitative comparison with Ref. 10, and D contains a quantitative com-
parison with Ref. 4. The supplementary material also includes a Matlab
VR
script for supplementary material D and a LTspice VRscript for Fig. 7 .
38M. Klee, “Biology’s built-in Faraday cages,” Am. J. Phys. 82(5), 451–459
(2014).
39Therdiff=rsumratio has also been referred to in the literature as an interfa-
ce’s “conductivity contrast.” See S. Makarov et al. ,Low-Frequency
276 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 276 04 October 2023 22:51:11
Electromagnetic Modeling for Electrical and Biological Systems Using
MATLAB (Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2016), p. 312.
40A. Datta et al. , “Validation of ﬁnite element model of transcranial electri-
cal stimulation using scalp potentials: Implications for clinical dose,”J. Neural Eng. 10(3), 036018 (2013).
41C. Wenger et al. , “Improving tumor treating ﬁelds treatment efﬁcacy in
patients with glioblastoma using personalized array layouts,” Int. J.
Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys. 94(5), 1137–1143 (2016).
42Reference 39, pp. 292–293. See also Ref. 33, p. 455, Eq. (17); Ref. 27,p .
186, Eqs. (15) and (20); R. Plonsey and R. Collin, Principles and
Applications of Electromagnetic Fields (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1961),
p. 179, Eqs. (5.54a) and (5.54b); and I. W. McAllister and G. C. Crichton,
“Analysis of the temporal electric ﬁelds in lossy dielectric media,” IEEE
Trans. Electr. Insul. 26(3), 513–528 (1991).
43In cases where xe=r/C281, where xis the angular frequency, the electrical
behavior of biological systems is often modeled parametrically as the
product of a time-varying factor f(t) times a steady state solution. See, for
example, Ref. 39, Sec. 1.1.4; R. Plonsey and D. Heppner, “Considerations
of quasi-stationarity in electrophysiological systems,” Bull. Math.
Biophys. 29(4), 657–664 (1967); C. Bossetti et al., “Analysis of the quasi-
static approximation for calculating potentials generated by neural stim-
ulation,” J. Neural Eng. 5(1), 44–53 (2008). Even for media having very
high dielectric constants, the xe=rratio is small for many of the frequen-
cies used for electrical brain stimulation. The low end of those frequencies
is on the order of 1–45 Hz, which is used for transcranial AC stimulation(see The Stimulated Brain: Cognitive Enhancement Using Non–Invasive
Brain Stimulation , edited by R. Kadosh (Elsevier, Amsterdam,
Netherlands, 2014)), while the high end is on the order of 100–300 kHz,
which is used to treat brain tumors (see Ref. 41). For these frequencies, a
dielectric constant of 5,000 e
0, and a conductivity of 0.25 S/m, the xe=r
ratio ranges from/C241/C210/C06to/C243/C210/C01. Thus, the parametric model is
justiﬁed in some cases, but not in others. Compare G. Gaugain et al.,“Quasi-static approximation error of electric ﬁeld analysis for transcranial
current stimulation,” preprint arXiv:2204.03555 (2022), which questions
whether capacitive effects can be ignored in full brain models even for very
low frequencies.
44P. Nunez and R. Srinivasan, Electric Fields of the Brain: The
Neurophysics of EEG , 2nd ed. (Oxford U. P., New York, 2006), p. 166.
45R. Plonsey, Bioelectric Phenomena (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1969),
pp. 203–204.
46J. Malmivuo and R. Plonsey, Bioelectromagnetism: Principles and
Applications of Bioelectric and Biomagnetic Fields (Oxford U. P.,
New York, 1995), pp. 456–457.
47Reference 44, pp. 166–169, 592–597.
48G. Scharf and C. Scharf, “Electrophysiology of living organs from ﬁrst
principles,” preprint arXiv:1006.3453 (2010); see also, for example, O. D.
Jeﬁmenko, Electricity and Magnetism: An Introduction to the Theory of
Electric and Magnetic Fields , 2nd ed. (Electret Scientiﬁc Company, Star
City, WV, 1989), p. 297: “…as far as the calculation of the stationary elec-
tric ﬁeld inside (or outside) a current-carrying conductor is concerned, the
current as such may be completely ignored, and only the charge distribu-
tion on the surface and in the interior of the conductor needs to be taken
into account. Thus the stationary ﬁelds of current-carrying conductors, just
like the electrostatic ﬁelds, have electric charges as their sources.”
49Some students will be familiar with the fact that charges accumulate at the
locations where current is introduced into a conductor as a result of having
been assigned problem 34 of Chapter 3 of Ref. 27, or having studied
Example 7.2 of D. J. Grifﬁths, Introduction to Electrodynamics , 4th ed.
(Pearson, Boston, 2013) or Example 9-5.1 of Ref. 48.
50N. Grossman et al. , “Noninvasive deep brain stimulation via temporally
interfering electric ﬁelds,” Cell169(6), 1029–1041 (2017).
51M. V €or€oslakos et al. , “Direct effects of transcranial electric stimulation on
brain circuits in rats and humans,” Nat. Commun. 9(1), 1–17 (2018).
52Kadosh, Ref. 43, Chap. 2.
53A. Liu et al. , “Immediate neurophysiological effects of transcranial electri-
cal stimulation,” Nat. Commun. 9(1), 1–12 (2018). (Despite more than
4000 publications (PubMed) on TES [Transcranial Electrical Stimulation]
in the past decade, we lack a mechanistic understanding of the mechanism(or mechanisms) by which this technique produces beneﬁcial or deleteri-
ous effects.); A. Fertonani and C. Miniussi, “Transcranial electrical stimu-lation: What we know and do not know about mechanisms,”Neuroscientist 23(2), 109–123 (2017).
54K. Caulﬁeld and M. George, “Optimizing transcranial direct current stimu-
lation (tDCS) electrode position, size, and distance doubles the on-targetcortical electric ﬁeld: Evidence from 3000 Human Connectome Projectmodels,” preprint bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.11.21.469417
(2021); A. Molero-Chamizo et al., “Standard non-personalized electricﬁeld modeling of twenty typical tDCS electrode conﬁgurations via thecomputational ﬁnite element method: Contributions and limitations of two
different approaches,” Biology 10(12), 1230–1252 (2021).
55M. Nitsche and W. Paulus, “Excitability changes induced in the human
motor cortex by weak transcranial direct current stimulation,” J. Physiol.
527(3), 633–639 (2000).
56S. Grimnes and Ø. Martinsen, Bioimpedance & Bioelectricity Basics , 3rd
ed. (Academic Press, Cambridge, MA, 2015).
57Practical Guide to Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation: Principles,Procedures and Applications , edited by H. Knotkova et al. (Springer, New
York, 2019); H. Thair et al. , “Transcranial direct current stimulation
(tDCS): A beginner’s guide for design and implementation,” Front.
Neurosci. 11, 641 (2017); A. Woods et al. , “A technical guide to tDCS,
and related non-invasive brain stimulation tools,” Clin. Neurophysiol.
127(2), 1031–1048 (2016).
58A. Datta et al. , “Gyri-precise head model of transcranial direct current
stimulation: Improved spatial focality using a ring electrode versus con-ventional rectangular pad,” Brain Stimul. 2(4), 201–207 (2009).
59A. Datta et al. , “Inter-individual variation during transcranial direct current
stimulation and normalization of dose using MRI-derived computational
models,” Front. Psychiatry 3(91), 91 (2012).
60M. Bikson et al. , “Safety of transcranial direct current stimulation:
Evidence based update 2016,” Brain Stimul. 9(5), 641–661 (2016).
61A. Datta et al. , “Individualized model predicts brain current ﬂow during
transcranial direct-current stimulation treatment in responsive strokepatient,” Brain Stimul. 4(3), 169–174 (2011).
62Z. Gimbutas and L. Greengard, “Simple FMM libraries for electrostatics,
slow viscous ﬂow, and frequency-domain wave propagation,” Commun.
Comput. Phys. 18(2), 516–528 (2015).
63Jean-Pascal Lefaucheur, “A comprehensive database of published tDCS
clinical trials (2005–2016),” Clin. Neurophysiol. 46(6), 319–398 (2016).
64For a review of various recent references, see E. Gianni et al. , “tDCS ran-
domized controlled trials in no-structural diseases: A quantitative review,”Sci. Rep. 11(1), 1–18 (2021).
65See, for example, R. Fields, “Amping up brain function: Transcranial stim-
ulation shows promise in speeding up learning,” Sci. Am. 25(2011),
available at http://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/amping-up-brain-
function/ ; J. Choe et al. , “Transcranial direct current stimulation modulates
neuronal activity and learning in pilot training,” Front. Human Neurosci.
10(34), 1–25 (2016); E. Strickland, “A new kind of juice,” IEEE Spectrum
53, 34–40 (2016); A. Kamali et al. , “Transcranial direct current stimula-
tion to enhance athletic performance outcome in experienced body-
builders,” PloS One 14(8), 1–20 (2019).
66Efforts to calculate the potentials produced by active neurons typically
use, a potential-centric approach. A charge-ﬁrst approach can be found inS. Makarov et al. , “Boundary element fast multipole method for enhanced
modeling of neurophysiological recordings,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.
68(1), 308–318 (2021).
67G. Buzs /C19akiet al. , “The origin of extracellular ﬁelds and currents-EEG,
ECoG, LFP and spikes,” Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 13(6), 407–420 (2012).
68Alliance for Advancing Bioelectronic Medicine, “Building a bioelectronic
medicine movement 2019: Insights from leaders in industry, academia,and research,” Bioelectronic Med. 6, 1–11 (2020); see also L. Peeples,
“Core concept: The rise of bioelectric medicine sparks interest amongresearchers, patients, and industry,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116(49),
24379–24382 (2019); A. Park, “Why it’s time to take electriﬁed medicineseriously,” TIME, October 24, 2019, available at https://time.com/
5709245/bioelectronic-medicine-treatments/ .
277 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Maurice M. Klee 277 04 October 2023 22:51:11
