
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkFEBRUARY 01 2022
A classical analog for defects in quantum band formation 
Paolo Francisco ; Tadan Cobb ; Shawn A. Hilbert ; Scott Carr
Am. J. Phys.  90, 103–109 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009053
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A classical analogy for quantum band formation
Am. J. Phys.  (August 2018)
Second-order superintegrable systems in conformally flat spaces. V . Two- and three-dimensional quantum
systems
J. Math. Phys.  (September 2006)
Classical Analogs of a Diatomic Chain
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2010) 04 October 2023 23:01:36
A classical analog for defects in quantum band formation
Paolo Francisco, Tadan Cobb, and Shawn A. Hilbert
Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Geology, Berry College, Mount Berry, Georgia 30149
Scott Carr
Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Geology, Berry College, Mount Berry, Georgia 30149 and
Department of Physics and Engineering Science, Coastal Carolina University, Conway, South Carolina 29528
(Received 3 September 2020; accepted 9 November 2021)
When many individual atoms come together to form a solid, their interaction splits their electronic
energy levels to form continuous bands separated by forbidden energy ranges known as band gaps.
Introducing defects in a solid results in new electron energy levels that may lie inside the
bandgaps. The presence of these defect levels is the heart of the semiconductor-based devices thatplay a signiﬁcant role in the modern world. Quantum mechanics provides the best description of
interacting atoms. However, band formation is not unique to small-scale atomic interactions but
rather is a result of the wave-nature of Schr €odinger’s equation, which governs quantum mechanics.
Using oscillations in a mass-spring system, we present a table-top, classical analog to the quantum
system illustrating how defects in a one-dimensional lattice produce changes to the band structure.
A pair of masses connected by a spring plays the role of a single atom. Interactions between“atoms” are introduced with weak coupling springs producing two distinct frequency bands from
the translational and fundamental modes. Defects are introduced by altering an oscillator pair’s
total mass or internal spring constant. We provide the theoretical groundwork and experimentalveriﬁcation of the model along with a discussion of the value and limitations of the model as a
macroscopic tool to visualize the microscopic world.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009053
I. INTRODUCTION
Doped semiconductors are an essential class of materials
in the modern world. They form the basis of computational
technology, energy-efﬁcient lighting in the form of LEDs,green energy production in the form of solar panels, and awide array of sensors including camera CCDs and radiationdetection chips.
1,2While the electronic applications of these
materials are important, it is valuable to understand themechanisms that give doped semiconductors their unique
electronic properties, especially as new doping methods are
constantly being explored.3In order to achieve this, one
must examine the band structure of semiconductors andobserve the effects of charge-carrying defects on that bandstructure.
In a single atom, bound electrons are restricted to occupy
one of many energy levels. Because the energy spacingof these levels is determined primarily by the nucleus, identi-cal atoms have levels with the same energy. When two iden-
tical atoms come sufﬁciently close to one another, identical
energy levels split to form two levels in the place of one. Asthe number of interacting atoms increases, as in crystallinesolids, the level splitting continues, producing as manyenergy levels as there are atoms. When the number of atomsbecomes large enough, the energy levels from the singleatom have split so many times that the energy differencebetween the levels becomes negligible compared to typical
thermal energy, effectively forming continuous energy bands
separated by bandgaps.
4
Semiconductors are a class of materials that have rela-
tively narrow bandgaps, typically on the order of 1 eV.5The
number of electrons in the material is such that, at zero tem-perature, the band below the gap, known as the valenceband, is completely ﬁlled with electrons, while the bandabove the gap, known as the conduction band, contains no
electrons. The absence of an electron is known as a hole, so
it can be said that the conduction band is fully occupied with
holes.
Doping is the intentional introduction of defects—atoms
of a different element or isotope—into a crystal to alter the
material’s band structure.
6Because the defect is not identical
to the other atoms in the material, its electronic energy levels
are distinct, and interactions with the crystal do not produceenergy level splitting in the same way. Instead, the interac-
tions produce new electron energy levels, which are often
outside of the energy bands of the undoped material.7These
new levels are referred to as defect levels, since they result
from the addition of defects into the material. In materials
used for practical applications, defects are chosen so that
these levels lie in close proximity to an energy band, at eithera slightly higher or a lower energy, so that electrons or holes
can be excited to the energy levels of the dopant at room
temperature.
Defects are classiﬁed based on the relative position of the
defect level within the bandgap. If the defect levels are near
the valence band, they effectively contribute holes to the sys-
tem and the corresponding atoms are known as p-type
defects. If the defect levels are near the conduction band,they contribute electrons to the crystal and the dopants are
known as n-type defects.
8The relative number of p- and n-
type defects plays a key role in the material’s electrical and
even magnetic properties.9,10
The energy of the defect levels is related to, but not
entirely determined by, the intrinsic properties of the doping
atoms. For instance, when silicon is doped with antimony or
phosphorous atoms, defect levels are created with energies39 and 44 meV above the valence band, respectively. In both
semiconductors, the defect state produced by antimony is at
103 Am. J. Phys. 90(2), February 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 103 04 October 2023 23:01:36
a lower energy than phosphorous, preserving a relative order
of the defect energy states. If the defect energy levels were
identical to those of the single atom levels, the energy differ-ence between levels of different atoms should be constant.
However, the separation of these energy levels is different in
different semiconductors, indicating that the energy level
due to the presence of the defect cannot be the same as the
defect atom’s energy levels. While the energy of the defect
level is related to the defect’s single atom energy levels, they
are not the same due to the bonding that takes place in the
crystal. All this emphasizes that the new energy levels in a
doped semiconductor illustrate a collective phenomenon.
The mechanism determining the defect level energies in
an electronic band gap—a purely quantum phenomenon—
can be reproduced in an analogous classical system. We
have previously shown that oscillators—in our case, pairs of
masses connected by a stiff spring—can model atoms. When
a large number of such oscillators are coupled by weaker
springs, the spectrum of resonance frequencies mimics the
structure of energy bands in a crystal.11In this paper, we
extend the analogy to model doping in semiconductors by
introducing a defect in the form of one oscillator differing in
either mass or spring constant. Varying the intrinsic proper-
ties of the defects produces changes in the frequency of the
defect level within the band gap. Furthermore, as we willshow, the frequency of the defect level within the oscillator
system is related but not identical to the resonant frequency
of the defect on its own, thus mirroring the formation of
defect levels in doped semiconductors.
II. THEORY
The band structure of a one-dimensional solid can be
understood using the classical analogy of coupled harmonic
oscillator pairs. Each harmonic oscillator pair—in our case,
two carts of equal mass linked together by a spring constant
k—plays the role of a single atom. These pairs of harmonic
oscillators can be linked to each other by a spring of constant
jto form an array, as shown in Fig. 1. The array of N=2
oscillator pairs represents a solid of N=2 atoms.
If springs are chosen such that k>j, the dominant inter-
actions are between the masses within a single oscillator.
This scenario is analogous to a solid where bonding modiﬁesthe single atom states but the interaction between the elec-
trons and nuclei plays the larger role in determining the
energy levels.
When masses are connected by springs and set into
motion, the relative motion of the masses can be describedas a combination of different modes. If the system is
arranged so that the motion contains just one mode, then
every mass in the system will oscillate in a sinusoidal motionwith the same frequency. The amplitudes of oscillation of
each mass will be different, as will the phase. When all
masses oscillate with sizable amplitude with the same reso-nant frequency, we refer to this as a mode.
A single oscillator pair has two modes. In the translational
mode, the masses are at rest relative to each other, and the
center of mass is free to move. The translational mode has aresonant frequency of f
T¼0 Hz. In the vibrational mode, the
center of mass is motionless while the two masses oscillate
180/C14out of phase (i.e., always moving in opposite directions
with the same speed). This mode has a resonant frequency
atfV¼ð2pÞ/C01ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
k=lp
, where lis the reduced mass for each
oscillator pair. When two oscillator pairs are coupled
together using an additional spring, new modes form with
resonant frequencies close to fTandfV.Accordingly, cou-
pling N=2 oscillator pairs splits each mode into N=2 resonan-
ces.11When N!þ 1 , essentially continuous resonant
frequency bands form.
The theoretical model that follows describes a system free
from any hard walls, meaning that the masses at each end of
the chain are connected only to a single spring. This system
is very difﬁcult to replicate experimentally since it requiressprings that function under both tension and compression.
These springs are quite stiff resulting in modes with high fre-
quencies and small amplitudes which would be extremelydifﬁcult to measure. To avoid this difﬁculty, the system
exclusively uses tension springs, and is loosely connected to
walls at both extremities. For these connections, we use veryweak springs of constant /C15such that /C15/C28k;j. This setup is
then qualitatively very similar to the same system with free
ends. We chose to present the derivation where /C15¼0, as it
most clearly illustrates the formation of bands and the effectsof defects. However, the result of the theoretical derivation
in Fig. 2takes into account the weak spring constants in
Fig. 1. (a) A photograph of one end of the experimental apparatus. (b) Schematic of an ideal lattice with coupled oscillator pairs. (c) and (d) Lattice w ith a
defect in the form of an oscillator pair with altered (c) spring constant or (d) altered mass.
104 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Francisco et al. 104 04 October 2023 23:01:36
order to provide direct comparison with the experimental
results.
The resonance modes of the system can be calculated
using a classical approach appropriate for an advanced
undergraduate mechanics course. Applying Newton’s second
law to each of the Nmasses produces Ncoupled differential
equations of motion.12This system of equations can be
solved assuming sinusoidal motion.
Consider the case for N¼6. While a derivation could be
done assuming each mass and spring has a unique value, we
will present one with identical masses and springs with the
same constants. We will use numerical subscripts to identify
each oscillator pair, and letter subscripts will differentiateeach mass in the pair. The displacement of each object from
its equilibrium position along the x-axis will be labeled x
i;ajb.
For example, the displacement of the left mass of the thirdoscillator pair will be labeled x
3a
m€x1a¼/C0kx1aþkx1b; (1)
m€x1b¼kx1a/C0ðjþkÞx1bþjx2a; (2)
m€x2a¼jx1b/C0ðjþkÞx2aþkx2b; (3)
m€x2b¼kx2a/C0ðjþkÞx2bþjx3a; (4)
m€x3a¼jx2b/C0ðjþkÞx3aþkx3b; (5)
and
m€x3b¼kx3a/C0kx3b: (6)
Rewriting this system of equations as a matrix equation
produces the familiar form of Hooke’s law
M€X¼/C0KX; (7)
where Xis a column vector of the displacements and Kis the
matrix containing the spring constants, such that
K¼k /C0k 000 0
/C0kjþk/C0j 00 0
0 /C0jj þk/C0k 00
00 /C0kjþk/C0j 0
00 0 /C0jj þk/C0k
0 000 /C0kk2
666666643
77777775;(8)andMis the matrix containing the oscillator masses, such
that
M¼Im; (9)
where Iis the identity matrix of size N.
The form of the MandKmatrices in Eq. (8), while written
here for N¼6, can be generalized for any value of
N.T h eﬁ r s t
and last diagonal elements will be k, because the masses at the
ends of the array are only connected to one spring. The inner
diagonal elements are jþk, since each mass within the array
is connected to its neighbors with one of each spring. Notably,the sequence of the coupling spring and the internal springcauses the alternation of jandkon the off-diagonals. In gen-
eral, the mass matrix in Eq. (9)is more straightforward to gen-
eralize, as it is a diagonal matrix of masses.
Because the system is expected to oscillate, X(t) in Eq. (7)
should have complex solutions of the form XðtÞ¼xe
ixt,
where xis a column vector of complex numbers. In this for-
mulation, xis the frequency of a mode, i.e., a resonant fre-
quency. Equation (7)then becomes
Mð/C0x2xeixtÞ¼/C0 KðxeixtÞ; (10)
and further rearrangement yields
ðK/C0x2MÞxeixt¼0: (11)
To achieve a nontrivial solution to this equation, the deter-
minant of the parenthetical term must be 0. The characteris-tic equation for the resonant frequencies xof the system is
detðK/C0x
2MÞ¼0: (12)
This yields Nsolutions for x2all of which are positive.
There are, therefore, 2 Npossible values for x. We will only
consider the positive solutions since the negative solutions ofthe same magnitude correspond to the same modes. For thepresent system, these frequencies form two bands. The low
frequency one stems from the translational mode of the sin-
gle oscillator pair, while the high frequency from the vibra-tional mode. These can be seen in Fig. 2(a), where Dk=k¼0
or Fig. 2(b), where Dm=m¼0.
Let us now introduce a defect into the system.
Unsurprisingly, a spring-type defect will introduce changes
Fig. 2. Calculated spectra of the mass-spring system with defects varying in (a) internal defect spring constant and (b) defect oscillator mass. The s tandard val-
ues used in the calculation are N¼6,k¼5 N/m, j¼1:7 N/m, 2 m¼289:16 g, and /C15¼0:95. The defect has been introduced in the leftmost oscillator pair.
Levels associated with the bands are drawn as red crosses ( þ), and the defect level is indicated with a blue dot ( /C1). Shaded vertical bars indicate experimentally
measured defect values.
105 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Francisco et al. 105 04 October 2023 23:01:36
to the Kmatrix, while a mass-type defect will introduce
changes to the Mmatrix. A defect can be introduced at the
site of any oscillator pair, as changing the location of thedefect will produce only small changes to the resonantmodes and frequencies. In our calculations, the defect willalways be introduced into the ﬁrst oscillator pair.
We introduce a spring-type defect by modifying the inter-
nal spring constant of one oscillator pair: k!k
0¼kþDk.
In doing so, Kbecomes
K0¼kþDk/C0kþDk ðÞ 000 0
/C0kþDk ðÞ jþkþDk ðÞ /C0j 00 0
0 /C0jj þk/C0k 00
00 /C0kjþk/C0j0
00 0 /C0jjþk/C0k
00 0 0 /C0kk2
6666666643
777777775:
(13)
Solving the characteristic equation for the system contain-
ing defects produces frequencies very similar to the purecrystal but with one level signiﬁcantly altered. When theinternal spring constant of the defect decreases ( Dk<0), the
resonant frequency of the mode at the bottom of the upperband drops into the gap, as shown in Fig. 2(a). This mode,
whose resonant frequency is most greatly affected by thedefect, will be referred to as the defect mode. As Dkbecomes
more negative, it approaches the lower band. In the regionwhere /C0Dk=k/C210:8k, the modes undergo very little change.
In the case where
/C0Dk=k¼1, which corresponds to
k0¼0, the mass on the free end of the oscillator chain is
decoupled from the rest, leaving effectively 11 masses in the
mass-and-spring system. Two levels (the third and fourth
lowest frequency modes in this case) converge, becomingdegenerate, leaving 11 modes instead of 12, as expected forthe coupling of 11 masses.
Let us now examine the effects of mass defects. We can
introduce a mass defect by replacing both masses of an oscil-lator pair by masses m
0¼mþDm. In this way, the matrix M
becomes
M0¼mþDm 0 0000
0 mþDm0000
00 m000
00 0 m00
00 0 0 m0
0 0 000 m2
6666666643
777777775: (14)
When the mass of the defect is larger than that of the stan-
dard pair ( Dm>0), the lowest mode of the upper band is
signiﬁcantly altered. For more massive defects, the mode’sresonant frequency shifts further into the bandgap, as seen inFig. 2(b). As with spring defects, very large mass defects
will drive the defect mode to the top of the lower band.
The magnitude of the defect ( DkorDm) results in speciﬁc
shifts of the resonance frequency of the defect mode; assuch, this resonance frequency is tunable. Speciﬁcally, asmallDkorDmcorrespond to a mode near the bottom of the
upper band, which is analogous to an n-type defect near theconduction band for semiconductors. Increasing the magni-tude of DkorDmshifts this resonance frequency downtoward the top of the lower band. The result is a mode analo-
gous to a p-type defect near the valence band.
This result can also be viewed as an avoided crossing at
/C0Dk=k¼0 and Dm=m¼0. If k
0>korm/C3<m, the reso-
nant frequency of the defect mode will appear above the
upper band.
It is important to note that there is an avoided crossing in
Fig. 2(a), as can be seen by the downward shifting of the
lower band frequency levels as the shifted defect frequencyapproaches the lower band. When the impurity oscillator
decoupled from the others, its oscillating mode frequency
would go to zero as /C0Dk=k!1 since this corresponds to
k
/C3!0. Since it is coupled to the system, the modes do not
cross but result in a downward shift in the modes. Avoidedcrossings are common in quantum systems where energy
bands are produced through interactions. This is another
example of quantum phenomena, which can be reproducedin classical systems.
13,14
The code used to generate the data in these ﬁgures is avail-
able in the supplementary material. Two versions of thescript are available, one for the paid software
MATLAB and
another in the free software MAXIMA . For the reader’s conve-
nience, both versions are fully commented.15
III. EXPERIMENT
The experimental system consists of six pairs of coupled
oscillators placed on a six-meter-long air track made of a
two-inch-wide square PVC pipe with one corner pointing
upwards. The pipe has 1/16-in. holes drilled every two centi-meters across the length of the track for the air to blowthrough. Air is supplied by two pumps, one at each end; eachpump is capable of outputting 1500 cubic feet (42 500 l) of
air per minute.
Each mass is a 3D-printed ABS plastic cart with a mass
m¼14563 g. CAD drawings of both the air track and the
carts are available in the supplementary material. Each carthas a hook on each end aligned with the center of mass aswell as cutouts in the top, where 20 g masses can be added.
In the defect-free scenario, the carts in an oscillator pair are
coupled by a spring of constant k¼5:060:1 N/m. These
oscillator pairs are, in turn, coupled with springs of constantj¼1:7060:04 N/m. In order to maintain tension through
the system, the ﬁrst and last carts are attached to ﬁxed walls
by springs of constant /C15¼0:9560:01 N/m; these weak
springs do not signiﬁcantly affect the resonant frequencies ofthe carts.
On the one end of the air track is a PASCO Motion Sensor
II, which records the position of the last cart as a function oftime. The carts are put in motion by pushing an arbitrary
selected cart along the x-axis. When a defect is introduced to
the system, however, we chose to give the initial impulse bypushing one of the two carts within the defect oscillator. Theposition of the end cart is sampled at 100 Hz for two minutes,after which internal damping usually makes the oscillation
amplitude too small to be accurately measured. A fast
Fourier transform (FFT) is performed on these data to derivethe amplitude and frequency of each mode. Multiple trialswere conducted by giving a different impulse to the same
mass. The results of these trials were averaged together. This
results in the appearance of two distinct bands, each contain-ing six resonant frequencies.
Spring defects are introduced by altering the internal
spring constant of the ﬁrst oscillator pair. Measurements
106 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Francisco et al. 106 04 October 2023 23:01:36
were made for k0¼5.0, 3.4, 2.5, 1.7, and 1.0 N/m. The
spring with the k0¼3.4 N/m constant was fabricated using
two springs, each of a spring constant of 1.7 N/m, mounted
in parallel. The end result yielded defects corresponding to/C0Dk¼0, 1.6, 2.5, 3.3, and 4.0 N/m. Mass defects were
introduced by inserting masses from a standard mass set into
each cart belonging to the ﬁrst oscillator pair. Measurementswere made for additions of Dm¼0, 40, 80, 120, and 160 g.
The selected spring defects produce defect modes whose fre-
quencies span the entirety of the gap. The same was not pos-sible using mass defects. Added mass above 160 g proved to
be too heavy for the air track to keep the carts aloft, so that
measurements could not be performed.
IV. RESULTS
Twenty trials of each defect type and strength were per-
formed. The spectra resulting from the FFTs were averaged
for identical conﬁgurations and are displayed in Fig. 3. The
amplitude (on the horizontal axis) is a measure of the contri-
bution of a given frequency (on the vertical axis) to the col-
lective motion of the masses. The amplitude is plotted usinga log scale to better show the relative intensity of the differ-
ent modes. For each resonance, the frequency of maximum
amplitude was deﬁned as f
OBS, and the uncertainty of fOBSis
deﬁned as half-width 95%-maximum. Regions of high inten-sity appear in two frequency ranges: a high frequency region
that spans 1.25–1.55 Hz, near the single-oscillator vibrational
mode frequency of 1.38 Hz, and a low frequency region thatspans 0.05–0.75 Hz, close to the 0.41 Hz single-oscillator
translational mode frequency. Each region, or band, is com-
posed of closely spaced resonant peaks. For comparison tothe experimental results, these frequencies are calculated for
a single oscillator coupled to hard walls with weak spring
constants /C15¼0:95 N/m. These bands are, respectively, anal-
ogous to the conduction and valence bands of a semiconduc-
tor, which grow out of closely spaced electronic levels.Between the bands, a gap is visible as a region of low
spectral amplitude, in which the only visible peak corre-
sponds to the defect mode (if any). As the defect strength
(DkorDm) increases in magnitude, the frequency of the
defect state decreases from a value near the upper band to
one close to the lower band. It is important to note that defect
modes higher in the gap (closer to the upper band) are thosewith larger spring constants and smaller mass differences as
expected. Finally, let us note that these measured resonance
frequencies in the spectra are in good agreement with thetheoretically calculated values shown as blue dots beside the
spectra.
Qualitatively, the mass-and-spring system replicates the
band structure in doped semiconductors. Defect modesappear in the bandgap when a non-identical “atom” is intro-
duced into the lattice. Depending on the intrinsic property of
the defect (spring constant or mass), the defect mode can sitjust below the upper (conduction) band or just above the
lower (valence) band.
The frequency of the defect resonance can be controlled,
allowing the system to be tuned as desired. In the same way,the nature of the dopants in a semiconductor will affect the
energy of the defect levels present in the bandgap.
We have shown that the band structure has the same form
in the classical and quantum systems, but more parallels can
be drawn by examining the evolution of the frequency of themode most affected by the defect. We will ﬁrst address
whether the frequency is the result of single atom behavior
or a collective phenomena. Then we will discuss the effectsof the internal degrees of freedom on the relative location of
a defect mode within the gap.
A common misconception is that the energy of the defect
level is equivalent to the energy of one of the electronic lev-els in the defect atom. Due to the difference in how the
energy of the levels in atoms and solids are measured, it is
difﬁcult to provide a direct comparison to dispel the idea.Atomic energy levels are determined experimentally by
Fig. 3. The solid lines indicate the measured frequency spectra of the mass-spring system averaged over 20 trials, while the dots indicate the theoret ical peak
locations. The spectra vary according to progressive (a) spring defects and (b) mass defects. Background lines are guides to the eye to highlight the t rend of the
frequency of the mode in the gap.
107 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Francisco et al. 107 04 October 2023 23:01:36
measuring its emission spectra. In this way, the energy levels
are deﬁned relative to the energy of a disassociated electron.
Electronic energy levels in materials are measured through
scattering processes, which provide the energy of an elec-
tronic state relative to the Fermi energy. Because of the dif-
ference in reference for these two methods, there is no clear
indicator of where the atomic energy states of the impurity
atom should appear within the electronic band structure of
the semiconductor. With the mass-and-spring system, the
resonant frequency of the defect atom can be directly com-
pared to the frequency of the defect mode to highlight thecollective nature of bonding. The vibrational mode frequen-
cies for a single defect oscillator pair have been calculated
and are presented in Table Ialong with the calculated and
measured frequencies of the corresponding defect modes.
While similar for the weakest defects, the single oscillator
frequency ( f
SO) and the measured frequency of the mode
associated with the defect ( fOBS) distinctively differ as the
strength of the defect increases. This is a clear indication that
the observed peaks in the gap are not due to the defect oscil-
lating at its natural frequency.
Naturally, this classical system does not replicate all of the
characteristics of the quantum system it analogizes. In the
quantum system, energy levels can be doubly occupied, when
accounting for spin, by either electrons, holes, or a combina-
tion of the two. Fermi–Dirac statistics, following from the
Pauli exclusion principle, determines which levels are occu-
pied.16Many interesting features of doped semiconductors,
such as their temperature dependence of resistivity, electronic
density of states, or the workings of a pn-junctions and transis-
tors, rely on the electrons being fermions.5In the classical sys-
tem, “occupation” of a resonant mode could be deﬁned as the
amplitude of that mode in the system’s motion. This occupa-
tion is neither binary (occupied or not) nor discrete (occurring
only in certain amounts) but rather is continuous. As a result,
the electronic properties of doped semiconductors cannot be
mimicked in the classical model. Furthermore, the nature of
the classical analogy allows the additional bandgap frequency
to be easily tuned by changing masses and spring constants.This is not generally true in semiconducting materials, which
have the additional constraints that they must actually be
made. This limits the elements that can be used as dopants
since they must be soluble in the semiconducting material at
high temperatures to produce a uniform crystal when cooled
even in the case of nanocrystalline materials.17,18
Unfortunately, the classical system fails to replicate the
uniquely quantum properties of real materials.
V. CONCLUSION
Beauty in physics often occurs when systems, although
very different to human eyes, have the same mathematicaldescription. Because Schr €odinger’s equation is wave-like,
quantum systems will naturally share properties with otherwave-like systems. In this case, inter- and intra-atomic inter-actions between atoms in a solid behave similarly to stiff and
weak springs connecting masses. As a result, insight gained
from the behavior of a classical, tabletop system of massesand springs can build intuition of the band structure of dopedsemiconductors. In the present case, formation of the bandstructure from single atoms, the effect of defects on thatband structure, and the effect of bonding on defect levels areeffectively analogized in the classical system of masses andsprings. Classical analogies succeed by accurately replicat-ing mathematical and structural similarities across thebranches of physics and by providing insight into the invisi-ble through tangible, desktop objects.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors extend a special thanks to Todd Timberlake
for essential assistance with computer programming.Additional discussion with Charles Lane and Wes Hittproved essential. In addition, the authors extend their thanksto HackBerry Labs for access to 3D-printing technology andtools for creating the carts used in this experiment. Thisproject was funded by Berry College.
1P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, “Mn-doped quantum dot sensitized solar
cells: A strategy to boost efﬁciency over 5%,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134,
2508–2511 (2012).
2S. Nikzad, Q. Yu, A. L. Smith, T. J. Jones, T. Tombrollo, and S. T. Elliott,“Direct detection and imaging of low-energy electrons with delta-doped
charge-coupled devices,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 3417–3419 (1998).
3G. Gu and Z. Xie, “Modulation doping of graphene: An approach toward
manufacturable devices,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 083502 (2011).
4S. Kasap, Principles of Electronic Materials and Devices (McGraw Hill,
New York, 2006), Chap. 4.
5N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Cengage
Learning, Boston, 1976).
6J. P. Schaffer, A. Saxena, S. D. Antolovich, T. H. Sanders, Jr., and S. B.
Warner, The Science and Design of Engineering Materials (McGraw Hill,
New York, 1999), Chap. 10.
7J. R. Taylor, C. D. Zaﬁratos, and M. A. Dubson, Modern Physics for
Scientists and Engineers (Prentice Hall, Hoboken, 2004), Chap. 14.
8F. T. Ulaby, M. M. Maharbiz, and C. M. Furse, Circuits (National
Technology & Science Press, Austin, 2016), Chap. 2.
9A. G. Foyt, J. P. Donnelly, and W. T. Lindley, “Efﬁcient doping of GaAsby Se ion implantation,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 14, 372–374 (1969).
10G. R. Pulliam, R. G. Warren, R. E. Holmes, and J. L. Archer, “Localized
doping of epitaxial ferrite ﬁlms,” J. Appl. Phys. 38, 2192–2194 (1967).
11P. Roberts, A. Skinner, T. Cobb, S. Carr, and S. A. Hilbert, “A classical
analogy for quantum band formation,” Am. J. Phys. 86, 609–615 (2018).
12J. R. Taylor, Classical Mechanics (University Science Books, Sausalito,
2005), Chap. 11.
13A. B. Lockhart, A. Skinner, W. Newman, D. B. Steinwachs, and S. A.
Hilbert, “An experimental demonstration of avoided crossings with masses
on springs,” Am. J. Phys. 86, 526–530 (2018).Table I. Frequency of the defect mode deﬁned by different methods. fSOis the calculated frequency of a single oscillator pair with the stated defect. fSY Sis the
calculated frequency of the defect mode using the formulation described in the theory. fOBSis the observed defect frequency determined by the position of the
peak with the largest amplitude within the band gap. Values in the parentheses are estimated uncertainties in the last digit of the reported value.
Dk(N/m) fSO(Hz) fSY S(Hz) fOBS(Hz) Dm(g) fSO(Hz) fSY S(Hz) fOBS(Hz)
/C01.6 1.164 (3) 1.185 (3) 1.194 (4) 40 1.170 (2) 1.234 (2) 1.232 (4)
/C02.5 1.020 (3) 1.055 (3) 1.045 (4) 80 1.061 (2) 1.133 (2) 1.126 (6)
/C03.3 0.871 (4) 0.929 (3) 0.933 (6) 120 0.948 (2) 1.045 (2) 1.045 (5)
/C04.0 0.719 (5) 0.823 (3) 0.835 (4) 160 0.911 (2) 0.980 (2) 0.980 (4)
108 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Francisco et al. 108 04 October 2023 23:01:36
14W. Newman, A. Skinner, and S. A. Hilbert, “An acoustic demonstration of
an avoided crossing,” Am. J. Phys. 85, 844–849 (2017).
15See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/10.0009053 for two versions of the code (MatLab and Maxima)
to ﬁnd the resonance frequencies and modes in a coupled oscillator system
as well as drawings for the air track and carts used in the experiment.16D. J. Grifﬁths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (Prentice Hall,
Hoboken, 1995), Chap. 5.
17S. B. Zhang, S.-H. Wei, and A. Zunger, “Elements of doping engineeringin semiconductors,” AIP Conf. Proc. 462, 62–69 (1999).
18S. C. Erwin, L. Zu, M. I. Haftel, A. L. Efros, T. A. Kennedy, and D. J.
Norris, “Doping semiconductor nanocrystals,” Nature 436, 91–94 (2005).
109 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Francisco et al. 109 04 October 2023 23:01:36
