
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2023
A course on climate change and sustainable building
designa) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Claire Akiko Marrache-Kikuchi  
 ; Guillaume Roux  
 ; Jean-Marie Fischbach ; Bertrand Pilette
Am. J. Phys.  91, 667–675 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0137570
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
References
The International Handbook of Physics Education Research: Special T opics
Physics as a Human Endeavor
The International Handbook of Physics Education Research: Special T opics 04 October 2023 22:55:56
A course on climate change and sustainable building designa)
Claire Akiko Marrache-Kikuchib)
Universit /C19e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, IJCLab, Orsay 91405, France
Guillaume Rouxc)
Universit /C19e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, LPTMS, Orsay 91405, France
Jean-Marie Fischbach and Bertrand Pilette
Magiste `re de Physique Fondamentale, Universit /C19e Paris-Saclay, Orsay 91405, France
(Received 3 December 2022; accepted 24 June 2023)
We present an intermediate-level course on sustainable physics, which combines lectures and
student projects. Sustainable physics concepts are progressively introduced through both a globaland a specialized perspective: climate change and building design. The lectures and hands-on
activities on both topics show how they share common concepts and provide complementary points
of view. Climate change mitigation and adaptation are touched on via student group projects,where they are asked to tackle a speciﬁc question of their choosing via reviews of the literature,
modeling, or experiments.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics
Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0137570
I. INTRODUCTION
Climate change and environmental issues in general are a
growing source of concern among the younger generation,
especially in high-income countries.1,2Like other students,
those studying physics show a strong appetite for coursesthat tackle these questions. Teaching about climate change is
challenging because there are more problems than solutions,
which generates anxiety among students.3Additionally,
many students get information on these topics from videos
or popular articles. These passive communication channelstend to leave students feeling helpless.
The community of researchers and educators also displays
a growing concern regarding climate change. In particular,
the physics community feels that it has the scientiﬁc back-
ground to tackle these problems, though it usually recognizes
that an interdisciplinary approach is critically needed.Instructors are often hesitant to teach topics that are outside
of their areas of expertise. Moreover, undergraduate-level
courses need to provide a bridge between high-school-level
and graduate-level education on energy and climate change.
Because physicists should, in principle, be able to teach allcourses at the bachelor’s level, we feel that there is a strong
motivation for developing general environmental physics
materials for and by non-experts but with a university-level
science content.
There are several ways to approach systemic issues. One
is the global approach, by discussing data and physicalmechanisms of global impact with regard to energy and cli-
mate. Another approach is to start from a focused topic, as
an example, and to progressively draw the threads toward all
the global issues to which it is connected.
In this paper, we describe an intermediate-level course for
physics students titled “Physics for sustainable devel-opment,” which tries to address these challenges in two main
ways. First, the structure of the course encourages active
learning. The lectures integrate hands-on tutorials and
ﬂipped classrooms; and the second half of the course
reserves time for group projects. We believe that this activeapproach to learning dispels anxiety. Second, we combine
teaching about global climate change problems withexplorations of a speciﬁc local solution: sustainable building
construction. This choice came from the expertise of one of
us and makes many relevant connections with global issues.
Architecture and housing also provide compelling topics for
projects. One of the pleasures and motivations for us is tobring scientiﬁc reasoning and physicists’ way of thinking
outside the typical physics realm. We show students that
physics provides them with skills to approach both complex
societal issues and everyday life situations.
Before describing the contents and the philosophy of this
course in more detail in Secs. II–III , let us mention the con-
text in which it was developed. The course was offered as an
elective to third year physics students at Paris-Saclay
University and started in spring 2020. The course typically
enrolled around 15 motivated students. We begin with 12 hof class sessions: 6 h on climate change and 6 h on building
design-related problems. The second part of the course is
dedicated to group projects, covering six 2 h-long sessions.
Students are expected to spend about the same amount of
time working outside class on the lectures and the project.
II. CLASS SESSIONS
The class sessions are deliberately designed to provide a
broad overview of the problems that cause and result from
climate change (see Table I). We do not shy away from dis-
cussing topics outside physics such as sociology, economics,
politics, or behavioral sciences. Our approach tries to treat
climate change as a complex system and to highlight the linkbetween the various ﬁelds. The ultimate goal is to have stu-
dents question their actions as well as the society they live
in, and develop critical thinking. Moreover, climate change
is not our research specialty; it is neither our place nor our
wish to give a specialized lecture on a given subject.
Sessions on climate change by Guillaume Roux and on
building design by Claire A. Marrache-Kikuchi alternate,
and, whenever possible, call on each other to create a coher-
ent syllabus. More precisely, the course is divided into
units (topics), each of which consists of a 2 h session thatincludes both a lecture and problem-solving tutorials. Each
topic is described in Sec. IIas follows. We emphasize that
667 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 667 04 October 2023 22:55:56
estimates of orders of magnitude and elementary modeling
through Fermi questions are crucial skills in the education ofphysicists. Our ﬁrst learning objective for students is to beable to handle these problems. This is all the morerelevant for tackling real-life physics problems and complex
systems, such as climate, as we do in this course. Examples
that we mention in class are detailed in the supplementarymaterial.
4
The lecture part of the course is evaluated by a 2 h-long
written exam comprising multiple choice questions andtutorial-like exercises with Fermi questions or elementarymodeling. Examples of problems (and their answers) are
given in Sec. IV of the supplementary material.
4The stu-
dents’ scores at the exam are varied. Out of the 40 studentswho have enrolled in the course since its creation 3 yearsago, 89% of students passed the exam. The average gradewas 13.3/20 (standard deviation of 2.6). The dispersion in
the results probably indicates the difﬁculty most students
have with elementary modeling and Fermi questions. Webelieve that this is to be expected, since most students neverhad to do this kind of reasoning before the course.
Regarding the scientiﬁc level of the lectures, we go into
more detail than we would for ﬁrst year students, but do notspecialize to the point of graduate level courses. Let us note
that, at Paris-Saclay University, most of our students have
already had a general introduction about environmental chal-lenges during their second year, which is mandatory for allbachelor students, whatever their major. It is a small privateonline course (a MOOC that is only accessible to students ofour university), the contents of which are freely available in
Ref.5(in French). Although this lecture-based course presents
several physical concepts, the level of the physics is low.
In our course, the lectures are quite dense, but are usually
useful to give students an overview of the diversity of issuesand ﬁll the gaps in their knowledge. Out of the 40 studentswho have attended the course, we have gathered the feed-
back of 31 of them. Their evaluation of the lecture part of
the course is satisfactory, though with a signiﬁcant variabil-ity: The average rating for this part on a 5-point scale was3.7 (standard deviation of 1.0).
A. Common concepts
Before entering into the details of the different subjects,
we would like to highlight that, although they seemunrelated, climate and building design share common con-
cepts emanating from physics, but also from chemistry andbiology. In this section, we list some of these concepts, sincethey can be taught in relation either with climate change orbuilding design, and reused in the other topic, with the satis-
faction of observing each time the universality of physics.
The ﬁrst subject is radiation, including Planck’s and
Stefan–Boltzmann’s laws. In the Solar constant activity,
4we
use the Stefan–Boltzmann law to determine the averagepower a given location receives from the Sun during day-light, called the solar constant G
SC’1360 W m/C02. The con-
cepts of emissivity, absorptivity, reﬂectivity, transmissivity,
and radiation heat transfer mechanism all enter into play
both in the Earth radiative balance and in heat transfers inbuildings. Convection, conduction, and diffusion are natu-rally relevant too. Among others, Ref. 6offers a clear pre-
sentation of these topics, full of everyday examples.
More generally, whenever possible, we try to establish a
connection between the theoretical concepts (e.g., thermody-
namics) seen in basic physics courses, and their conse-quences for practical systems (e.g., thermal machines, heatlosses, and evaporative energy). We ﬁnd that this does notnecessarily require a sophisticated mathematical treatmentand enables the description of a wide variety of phenomena
and practical realizations. Fluid mechanics is another com-
mon tool with applications ranging from the atmospheric cir-culation to natural ventilation in buildings or wind turbines.
Beyond physics, basic concepts of chemistry and biology
are useful. General concepts about climate classiﬁcation andbiomes are actually determinant for urbanization and civili-zation development. As a common starting point, we ask the
class to work in groups to determine the climate in a site of
their choosing and to discuss its impact on building concep-tion (see the Climate assessment activity
4).7Similarly, trees
play a role in biogeochemical cycles and in urban planning.In the Cooling effect of trees activity,4we estimate the
energy necessary to evaporate the 450 l of water produced
daily by a large tree, and ﬁnd that it is equivalent to that ofsix domestic coolers ( /C242.5 kW) running for 19 h per day.
B. Climate change
Here, we present the structure of the climate portion of the
course. The subject being very broad, we decided to empha-size two main goals. The ﬁrst is to contextualize the issue inTable I. A possible chronological sequence of class sessions alternating between topics of Secs. II BandII C. Other sequences could be imagined.
WeekDiscussed
in section Topic Duration Main topics covered
1 II B 1 Anthropocene 1 h Ozone depletion, great acceleration, biogeochemical cycles
1 and 3 II B 2 Climate change 2 h Radiative balance, greenhouse effect, energy redistribution, anthropic perturbations,
modeling and projections, probes and impacts of global warming
2 II C 1 Urbanization - What is at stake? 1 h World urban demography, critical review of some sustainable building practices
2 II C 2 Principles of bioclimatic
construction1 h Assessing the climate of a building site, inﬂuence of the building conception on its
sustainability
3 and 5 II B 3 Energy and society 2 h Energy supply chain, everyday life orders of magnitudes, energy mix, fossils energies,
connection to economy and development
4 II C 3 Energy in buildings 2 h Review of energy sources for a building, energy production, and recovery systems
5 II B 4 Challenges for sustainable
development1 h Geography with orders of magnitudes on population and territories, global views on
sustainable development challenges
6 II C 4 Thermal considerations in
buildings and in the city2 h Heat transfer mechanisms, urban heat island effect
668 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Marrache-Kikuchi et al. 668 04 October 2023 22:55:56
order to gain a broader perspective. The second goal is to
give the salient scientiﬁc facts explaining the human-causedclimate change. In passing, we deﬁne and explain someessential concepts that appear in Intergovernmental Panel onClimate Change (IPCC) reports.
8To this end, we aim at
making the students comfortable reading more advanced lit-
erature such as IPCC reports and research papers. These lec-tures are centered on climate change but actually go beyondthe physics of the climate system by tackling typical environ-mental physics topics for which a useful Resource Letter
9is
available.
1. Anthropocene
The course opens with a 1 h lecture on the
“Anthropocene.” The idea is to embed climate changeamong the global impacts of humans and discuss key num-
bers of the “great acceleration.”10–12Through the example of
ozone depletion and the perturbation of global biogeochemi-cal cycles, we understand the interconnection of the mainchallenges of environmental science. One motivation is thatphysicists often have a techno-solutionist bias of climatechange mitigation, that consists of trying to“restore” the carboncycle. However, a global perspective shows that carbon-focused solutions most often raise issues in related environ-mental domains, for instance, land use, water use, nitrogen and
phosphorous cycles, or biodiversity.
13Yet the great advantage
of the carbon cycle is that it is very well documented andallows for many “Fermi questions,” which keep studentsfocused. Doing the quantitative calculations by oneself raisesawareness. In example II.A in the supplementary material,
4we
give the example of a class activity estimating how many giga-tons of carbon have to be emitted to increase the atmosphereconcentration by 1 ppm.
2. Climate change
This lecture proposes an overview of the main concepts of
climate science with few mathematical aspects. The focus is
on understanding the orders of magnitude, the time scales,
and the main components and mechanisms of the climatesystem. The emphasis is placed on the radiative balance andgreenhouse effect for its importance in current global warm-ing. Another focus is on climate observed impacts and cli-mate projections, with or without human-caused sources. Wedeﬁne radiative forcing, feedback, climate sensitivity, andtransient response. The scientiﬁc level, spirit, arguments, andcontents that are developed are strongly inspired by three
books: Refs. 14–16 .American Journal of Physics also pro-
vides two recent Resource Letters on climate change.
17,18
Additional and updated ﬁgures are found in specialized
resources, particularly in the IPCC reports. The question ofthe impact of climate change on societies opens the discus-sion beyond scientiﬁc facts. For an example of class activityon the modeling of radiative balance and understanding thegreenhouse effect, see II.B in the supplementary material.
4
3. Energy and society
This topic naturally follows in a course for physicists,
since fossil energies represents about 75% of greenhouse gas
emissions. After recalling some basics of energy and power,
energy supply chains are presented in order to help studentsunderstand the ﬁgures and deﬁnitions used in the economicsof energy. Scenarios about the possible evolution of globaland national energy mix are presented. The physics of the
main energy sources is discussed taking a broad perspective
and using students’ background. Dedicated to everyday and
industrial energy uses, this topic allows for many Fermiquestions and estimates for energy consumption or powerrequirements. Here, the spirit is certainly inspired by the cel-
ebrated book by David Mackay,
19freely available, and also
the recent well written textbook by Jaffe and Taylor.20
Another source of inspiration for this topic is the French pop-
ularizer Jean-Marc Jancovici,21who stresses society depen-
dencies upon fossil energies, with similar viewpoints as thatof Vaclav Smil.22
Although this lecture deals with the most physics-related
topics, most ideas are new for students, despite the fact that
they usually have some qualitative knowledge about energy
supply chains. The lecture is founded on usage in terms ofquantity, but includes discussions of lifestyle. This is a goodplace to introduce concepts such as the Jevons paradox,
23
technological lock-in,24and the coupling between economic
growth and energy consumption.25The ideas are conveyed
through examples. We ﬁnd the example of cars, from their
energy supply chain to their social impacts and the corre-
sponding reshaping of urbanization, enlightening.
This class session is also well suited for discussing the
ﬁnite resources problem in environmental science. The con-cept of peak oil is well known in the ﬁeld of fossil energy,
but supplies of materials that are critical for renewable
energy, such as copper, rare-earth elements, cobalt, and lith-ium, may also limit development.
26A historical perspective
eventually opens a discussion at the crossroads between
physics and social sciences. For an example of class activityrelated to energy in everyday life, see II.C in the supplemen-tary material
4for the example of the power and CO 2emis-
sions of thermal cars. Other examples are food and batteries
for energy storage.
4. Challenges for sustainable development
In the ﬁnal unit, we talk about subjects that do not usually
belong to physics, which lead to controversial questionsabout human development. Our motivation is to show stu-
dents both the power and the limitations of technical and sci-
entiﬁc perspectives in relation to global issues. We discussﬁgures about land occupation on Earth, population densities,
and other basics geographical facts. We teach some aspects
of global environmental history,
27showing how the indus-
trial revolution led to the 20th century’s great acceleration.We discuss demographic challenges28–30as well as other
limitations of human development. We introduce the debate
over historical responsibilities for global climate change andits inequitable impacts. We do not attempt to answer thesequestions, but we show students how they are addressed by
the social sciences community. For an example of a class
activity on demography, in which modeling populationgrowth helps to understand the social roots of the main
demographic indicators, see II.D in the supplementary
material.
4
C. Sustainable building design
Architecture is a key industry in relation to climate
change. The United Nations estimated that, in 2020, 55% of
the world population lived in urban areas and predicts that,
by 2050, this ﬁgure will be close to 70%.31This means that
669 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Marrache-Kikuchi et al. 669 04 October 2023 22:55:56
about 2.5 billion new urban dwellers will arrive in fast-
expanding cities mainly located in South-East Asia, India,
Africa, and Central and South America.32These new urban
centers will need infrastructures, ofﬁce buildings, and dwell-ings, the construction of which represents a huge challengein a short time frame, and given the commitments of the
2016 Paris Climate Agreement.
In 2020, the building industry—including building opera-
tions, building materials manufacturing, and construction—represented 35% of the world’s energy consumption, and
almost 40% of the global CO
2emissions.33This industry is
the second largest producer of primary plastic,34and the
main source of material consumption,35with consequences
that may be catastrophic both socially and environmentally.
For instance, the mining of the sand needed to fabricate con-
crete is responsible for land loss as well as for the develop-ment of criminal groups.36,37
Concomitantly, architects explore new ways of building,
promote the use of new materials and technologies, and
revisit traditional building techniques, to make new construc-
tions more sustainable. Architecture and the building indus-try as a whole is, therefore, experiencing an upsurge of ideas
and innovation, which can in turn be appraised by scientists.
From a pedagogical point of view, the topic of building
design in the context of climate change gives us the opportu-nity to focus on a topic that is familiar to students. The sys-tems are smaller—a house, a building, a neighborhood—and
the stakes seem more manageable than when tackling cli-
mate change as a whole. These are also ideal systems to putvarious concepts of physics into practice.
We chose a ﬂipped learning approach: Students are
required to have read a chapter on the topic at hand before
class. At the beginning of the class, some examples are dis-cussed, but most of the time is spent in solving Fermi ques-tions, or in group activities. For each topic, we will detail
both the content of the written lecture notes
4and the class
activities.
1. Urbanization—What is at stake?
This part of the course starts with an hour-long introduc-
tory lecture, the only one in this part that is not a ﬂippedclassroom. After presenting a few ﬁgures on the demography
and geography of the world urban population, the impact of
the building industry is assessed in terms of energy andmaterial consumption. A few issues are stated, and some of
the proposed solutions critically discussed to highlight the
fact that none is ever perfect, but also to debunk some unrea-sonable performance promises or green-washing advertising.
One example is the use of recycled shipping containers to
build either temporary
38or cheap permanent housing.39This
construction method uses recycled materials, reduces mate-
rial waste, and can be completed rapidly. However, thosewho advocate retroﬁtting these containers into dwellings
rarely consider the thermal performance of this envelope,
and the environmental cost of heating, cooling, and ventilat-ing these structures can easily exceed the beneﬁt of theirconstruction method.
Commercial air ﬁltering solutions to reduce particulate
matter pollution are very diverse, and include urban infra-
structures that vacuum air particles through a high voltage(30 kV) ionizing chamber,
40moss modules that claim to
have the same air-cleaning capability as more than 250
trees,41and TiO 2-based photocatalytic fabrics that removeNO xcompounds from the air to produce nitric acid.42We
discuss whether the advertised performance of these air-ﬁltering techniques are realistic, and what the drawbacks canbe in terms of public safety, energy consumption, or toxicrelease.
In the same spirit, the advantages and drawbacks of photo-
voltaic energy, wind turbines, hydropower, geothermalenergy, or nuclear energy are discussed. Solutions for watermanagement
43can be debated in light of the urban or rural
context. The sustainability and economics of urban farms are
also potential topics for discussion and debate.44
2. Principles of bioclimatic construction
This topic aims at understanding the physical principles
underlying bioclimatic construction.45Students are also
expected to exercise critical thinking to assess the sustain-ability of the purported “green” or “sustainable” projects.
The ﬁrst step in designing a sustainable building is to char-
acterize the climate of the site. In this course, this is the pre-text to determine the energy that is available from solarradiation (see the Solar constant activity
4), introduce the use
of a heliodon for measuring the sun’s local angle of inci-dence, and reﬂect on the inﬂuence of wind speed and rainfallon a building (see the Climate assessment activity
4,46). The
inﬂuence of the building environment, such as urbanizationand terrain, is also examined. The wind turbulence in urbanenvironments can, for example, be studied as a practicalapplication of elementary ﬂuid mechanics.
We then continue by studying the inﬂuence of building
design on energy consumption. The surface-to-volume ratioof a building is, for instance, an important parameter: The
higher it is, the higher the energy demand, the higher the
cooling effect of the wind, the more the soil is impervious towater, but the larger the natural lighting, and the larger thearea of photovoltaic modules that can be installed. We con-sider how the projected use of the building affects the opti-mal window size and building orientation with regard toheating and lighting demands.
47We quantitatively evaluate
the importance of albedo for external surfaces (fac ¸ades and
roofs) through the case study of the “Cool Roofs” initiativein New York:
48Knowing the global irradiation in New
York, one can estimate the surface temperature of a layer ofblack or white gravel and show that the difference in albedois responsible for a surface temperature difference of severaltens of degrees (see the detailed derivation in the supplemen-tary material
4). The basic deﬁnitions used for lighting are
given (luminance, ﬂux, emittance, intensity), and lighting
solutions are discussed, including circadian lighting usingLEDs and the transport of natural daylight in a buildingthrough optical ﬁbers or reﬂecting pipes. Water collectiondevices, water recycling capabilities, and water puriﬁcationsystems are introduced.
This lecture ends by listing the most commonly used sus-
tainability certiﬁcation labels. A possible activity or home-work consists in reviewing the criteria a particularcertiﬁcation label requires (for new or retroﬁtted buildings,infrastructures, or neighborhoods) (see the Assessing the sus-
tainability labels activity
4). Students can then make up their
own mind on how stringent or effective the certiﬁcations are.
The embodied energy of buildings49–51and the life cycle
analysis of building materials52,53could be interesting addi-
tional topics to discuss. Due to time constraints, we have
670 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Marrache-Kikuchi et al. 670 04 October 2023 22:55:56
chosen to leave these subjects for the interested students to
tackle as projects.
As a homework assignment, we ask students to investigate
one physical quantity (solar irradiation, energy, water consump-
tion, etc.) and to establish a few orders of magnitude for these
quantities (see the Orders of magnitude activity4). This exercise
is designed to make them manipulate orders of magnitude andconnect physical quant ities to their everyday life.
3. Energy in buildings
This topic closely follows the lecture on energy in relation
to climate change (Sec. I IB3 ). First, we list the energy
demands in buildings: heating, cooling, dehumidiﬁcation,hot water production, air handling units, fan coil units, andthe various electrical appliances, the importance of whichmay vary depending on the building’s usage (dwelling,
ofﬁce, factory). The coefﬁcient of performance (CoP) for
energy production devices is deﬁned. Various sources ofenergy are then discussed:
54geothermal energy, solar ther-
mal collectors, photovoltaic panels (see the Determining a
site’s photovoltaic potential activity4), and wind turbines
(see the Wind Power activity4). Energy production systems
such as boilers, heat pumps, cogenerators, chillers, and cool-ing towers, as well as energy recovery systems such as dualﬂow ventilation systems and energy recovery from graywater are mentioned. The aim of this lecture is for students
to have a very broad overview of the various energy systems
that are used in the construction industry, and to discuss theiradvantages and downsides.
When mentioning geothermal energy, we also study two
examples in depth. The ﬁrst one deals with underground
buildings. Throughout the world, there are examples of
underground buildings, both modern and indigenous.
55
These buildings are particularly interesting examples forphysicists because they make use of the thermal propertiesof the ground, based on the fact that daily or seasonal ther-
mal ﬂuctuations at the Earth’s surface are strongly
damped—by almost a factor of 10—at a depth of 5 m.
56
Moreover, through its large thermal inertia, the soil acts onthe corresponding building’s facades as a thermal bath.
The second example we study in class is the principle of
thermal labyrinths56and Canadian wells (see the Estimation
of a Canadian well’s efﬁciency activity4). These are very
simple devices that draw the fresh air needed to ventilate ahouse or a building through an underground concrete laby-rinth or a buried plastic pipe. The incoming air is thereforewarmed in winter and cooled in summer, taking advantage
of the ground’s quasi-constant temperature throughout the
year. The activity is designed to introduce modeling method-ology. The objective is not to obtain an exact solution, butrather to outline how a physicist would reason to have an
estimate of the answer (in the present case, by how much can
you increase or decrease the temperature of the incoming airby having it go through a Canadian well). The modelingmethodology (start with the simplest possible system andmake simplifying assumptions before moving on to a more
complex description) is a soft skill that will be useful to stu-
dents whatever their future careers may be. In the realm ofarchitecture, engineering consultants often consider all thebuilding’s complexity when simulating its thermal response,for instance, via dedicated software. The process is long and
relatively computation-intensive, so their advice cannot be
readily actionable in a building’s design phase. A simpliﬁedsimulation, /C18a la physicist , by contrast, may give in a few
hours an approximate solution that may be used by architectsto optimize their design.
4. Thermal considerations in buildings and in the city
The last lecture deals with heat transfer mechanisms,
which are one of the main issues for the construction indus-try in relation to climate change. Although the thermal per-
formance of new dwellings and ofﬁces has improved in the
past decades, at least in richer countries, heating and coolingstill account for about 50% of the energy needs in a build-ing,
57and for about 30% of the global CO 2emissions.33At
larger scales, the urban heat island effect58,59has rendered
cities both less comfortable to live in and more in need ofcooling solutions.
First, the basics of heat transfer phenomena are recalled:
natural and forced convection, radiation, and conduction.
The notion of thermal resistance is introduced on an example
taken from the building sector. For instance, one can calcu-late the effective thermal resistance of a window pane com-posed of a glazing ﬁtted within a wooden frame, very muchlike one would determine the effective resistance of a resistornetwork. Determining the temperature in an igloo (see theTemperature in an igloo activity
4) is a nice example of the
competition between radiative and conductive heat trans-
fers.60This activity is also designed to encourage students to
make assumptions, for instance, on the igloo size or its occu-pation. We expect them to come up with an order of magni-tude of the temperature, show them how this result depends(or more likely scarcely depends) on the details of the model,and compare it to measurements that are reported online.
61,62
After an assessment of all possible heat ﬂows that come
into play in a building, we also introduce the notion of ther-mal inertia. When considering the electrical analogy of the
heat equation, thermal inertia acts as a capacitor C, so that a
building can be modeled by a (complex) RCcircuit, where
the electrical resistance Ris analogous to the thermal resis-
tance in the initial problem. This is actually at the basis of anenergy performance measurement method for houses.
63
Evaporative cooling is also mentioned: Latent heat associ-ated with phase change can be used as a way to cool downbuildings or streets.
45
Indigenous architecture offers some interesting examples
of optimized heat transfers within a house. Windcatchers,
windtowers, or solar chimney houses in the Middle-Eastsuck the outside air in, cool it down either by making thedraft go through a cooler underground pipe or by putting itin contact with water, before letting it enter the dwelling.
64,65
Yakhchals in Iran, ice houses in the gardens of the Ch ^ateau
de Versailles (France) or in the Boboli Gardens in Florence(Italy) were built to store ice during summer. Yakhchals alsohad a neighboring pool where ice could be formed at night,
thanks to the radiative transfer from the pool to the sky
66,67
(see the Temperature within a Yakhchal problem4).
We ﬁnish by discussing the urban heat island effect (see
theEffect of the albedo activity4) and the effect of vegetation
to mitigate it (see the Cooling effect of trees activity4).
III. STUDENT PROJECTS
The second part of the course is dedicated to student proj-
ects.68In our curriculum, this is often the ﬁrst university-level
science project students have to undertake. Pedagogically, this
671 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Marrache-Kikuchi et al. 671 04 October 2023 22:55:56
part presents all the beneﬁts of project-based learning: An
increased student involvement, learning to manage the differentparts of a project, learning to anticipate and adapt, learningabout the methodology of research and, more generally, of sci-entiﬁc reasoning, reading literature, and developing manual
skills. The ﬁrst learning objective is to learn the basics of envi-
ronmental physics, as described in Sec. II. Our second learning
objective for this course, therefore, is for students to learn themethodology to approach a physics problem: identify a prob-lem, do a literature search, deﬁne the means of investigation,and overcome obstacles that may arise in the course of thestudy. Moreover, lectures on climate change often focus onassessing the reality of global warming, and explaining thecauses of this tremendous change in our daily environment,
without offering practical solutions to mitigate these effects. As
a consequence, students may feel that the answers to climatechange escape them, thus leading to a lesser involvementin these issues, and to increased distancing and anxiety.We believe these projects offer a partial remedy to this by show-
ing the students they can use their skills in physics to develop a
meaningful project in a short time frame (12 h in class).
A. Methodology
For these projects, students choose to work alone or in
groups, although we encourage them to team up in groups of
up to four. They can investigate any topic in relation to the
theme of the course through numerical simulations, casestudies, review of the literature, or experiments.
Although we give examples of possible subjects, we insist
that the deﬁnition and decision-making process lie in the stu-
dents’ hands. As choosing and deﬁning a project takes time,we start early on, during the ﬁrst part of the course, with a
collective brainstorming to list possible topics for the proj-
ects, although some students come to the ﬁrst lecture with aprecise and well-thought-out project that reﬂects their
Table II. List of student projects developed over the course of three academic years. CS stands for case studies, LR for literature review, S for simula tions, and
E for experiments. The projects marked with a†were performed in the period of lockdown during the COVID-19 pandemic.
CS LR S E
Climate change The inﬂuence of glaciers on climate change†
The importance and consequences of measuring temperature 
Energy production Extracting energy from ocean waves†
Extracting energy from waves (2) 
Small wind turbine model 
Offshore wind farms 
Study of thermoelectric generators for powering mobile devices 
Characterization of a thin ﬁlm solar panel 
Experimental investigation of the stack effect 
Energy transfer Thermal conductivity of popcorn bricks†
Thermal conductivity of a cork wall 
Thermal conductivity of a straw wall 
Heat transfer mechanisms in a house mock-up 
Subground housing†
Efﬁciency of vegetated roofs for heat transfer from the roof†
Insulating materials and application to the case of a tiny house†
Construction and characterization of a solar oven 
Performance assessment Case study: Parans light collector for bringing daylight in dark places†
Building performance Energy performance of Powerhouse Kjørbo (Sandvika, Norway)†
Energy and water consumption performance of ABC Residence (Grenoble, France) 
Criteria for a sustainable building 
Energy efﬁciency of an apartment—simulations and measurements†
Urban development Simulation of trafﬁc jams†
Statistical physics modeling of city growth 
Modeling of the transportation network of the Paris (France) region 
Inﬂuence of the sand on African roads†
Efﬁciency of sand barriers for the control of desertiﬁcation 
Water management Water self-sufﬁciency—Consumption and supply methods 
Water management—Case study of the Plateau de Saclay (France) 
Agriculture and vegetation How do plants affect the air we breathe†
Inﬂuence of vegetated schoolyards on the urban heat island effect†
Can a region be self-sufﬁcient in vegetables?†
Ground humidity as a function of ground cover 
Light pollution: Causes, consequences, and solutions 
Waste Using magnetic levitation to sort plastic wastes 
672 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Marrache-Kikuchi et al. 672 04 October 2023 22:55:56
personal interest. We then ask them to ﬁll in a Project
Description form where they have to list the necessary orrequired steps toward the completion of the project. Theyalso need to say, whether they intend to visit some buildingor laboratory sites. This encourages them to look beyond thestrict boundaries of their curriculum to seek advice andknowledge from academics and/or architects, which theyoften imagine as out of reach. If their project is experimental,they also need to draft an experimental protocol and list thematerial, sensors, and apparatus they might need.
We deliberately want to keep the projects low-cost and
do-it-yourself as much as possible to encourage creativityand have the students realize that they do not need expensiveequipment to produce scientiﬁc results. For this, the projectsbeneﬁt from the existing lab infrastructure at the PhysicsDepartment of University Paris-Saclay. We have boughtsome dedicated sensors speciﬁcally for this course, includingsome Arduino-based sensors (humidity level sensors, lightsensors, pressure sensors, thermometers, etc.), that are listedin Sec. V of the supplementary material.
4Students also
make use of consumables such as wood, metal plates, card-board, or polystyrene. If a project requires additional materi-als or equipment, we have a small annual budget of aboutU.S. $500 to buy the missing items.
In the next step, the instructors review the various Project
Description forms. The objective is to narrow down topicsthat may be too broad to cover in a 12 h-project, or to cautionthe students when we believe a project may be difﬁcult tocomplete successfully.
The various groups then work autonomously (but under
our supervision) on their project, for six weeks. Each week,there is an open session of 2 h for lab work and discussionswith educators. For experimental projects, the lab is accessi-ble outside class hours. For modeling and case study proj-ects, students complete their work at home in addition tothese sessions. At the end of the course, they have to producea written report, which they also defend orally. If time per-mits, we try to organize a separate ungraded presentationsession, so that all the class beneﬁts from the projects of theothers. Generally, students do quite well on this part: Of the40 students we have taught, the average grade was 13.6/20(standard deviation of 2.8).
B. Examples of student projects
The projects developed by students since the creation of
this course in spring 2020 are listed in Table II. The corre-
sponding reports are accessible on the course’s webpage.
69
As can be seen, they are very diverse and tackle topicsrelated to both climate change and to the built environment.They are relatively balanced between experimental projects,modeling, and literature surveys.
As educators, we have generally found that the students
were engaged and enthusiastic when undertaking their pro-ject. From the feedback of 31 students, 100% rated the pro-ject part of the course with a grade of 3 or more out of 5, and77% rated it with the maximum grade of 5. They liked thehands-on experience and the opportunity to investigate aquestion that interested them. While 55% of the studentswho answered the post-course evaluation were satisﬁed withthe balance between lectures and the project, 39% wouldhave preferred to have more time for their project. To us,this shows the importance of having students develop theirown reasoning, but also signals an increased level ofinvolvement in projects. Most of those who conducted exper-
imental work were extremely satisﬁed with the outcome, andthis was especially true during the COVID-19 pandemic
when they realized they could perform meaningful experi-
ments at home (e.g., assessing the thermal properties of apopcorn brick (Fig. 1), measuring the inﬂuence of plants’
respiration and photosynthesis on the air composition (Fig.
2), and using their own apartment for conducting real-scale
experiments on its thermal performance). Students also real-ized, as it had been emphasized in the Climate Change lec-tures, the multidisciplinary approach inherent to this topic.One group, for instance, collaborated with a geophysicist to
analyze the depth-dependent soil temperature that he had
measured.
70Finally, we believe that these projects encour-
aged students to take action and develop their own local
Fig. 1. Experimental project aimed at comparing the heat conductance of a
popcorn brick to that of a piece of wood. The experiment was performed at
home during the COVID-19 lockdown. Courtesy of Th /C19eophile Tanguy. The
top panel shows an infrared image of the popcorn brick (top black square)
and of the piece of wood (left black rectangle) when heated by a frying pan.
Fig. 2. Experimental project to correlate the CO 2concentration in a plastic
box containing a plant (shown in the inset) with the luminosity. The
photosynthesis-dominated phase (when the lighting level is high) gives way
at night to a respiration-dominated phase. The experiment was performed at
home during the COVID-19 lockdown. Courtesy of Audrey Goutard.
673 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Marrache-Kikuchi et al. 673 04 October 2023 22:55:56
solutions to ﬁght climate change. Several students chose to
continue studies of environmental science. Another has
developed a simulation showing how a neighborhood could
achieve water self-sufﬁciency by collecting rainwater. She iscurrently building a water-retaining tank at her parents’
house to achieve this goal.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The development of this course, with its relatively unusual
structure, has been and still is a work-in-progress. We seeseveral beneﬁts and also a few shortcomings, which should
be acknowledged.
Starting with the shortcomings, including such dense lec-
tures as well as student projects is probably too ambitiousfor 12 sessions (overall course time of 24 h). Students
sometimes complain that we cover too many topics and that
they lack time for the project. Another shortcoming is thatwe do not provide an in-depth study of some physics-
related topics. However, we envision this as a bridge
toward specialized graduate level courses. For instance,although we try to convey many non-trivial concepts to stu-
dents, explaining the equations and techniques at the heart
of climate modeling is beyond our expertise and would ﬁlla whole course. On the positive side, this intermediate level
lecture with a broad spectrum that includes building design
is a great opportunity for us to discuss everyday life and thepractical aspects of physics, which are often left aside in
fundamental physics courses. This is also an opportunity to
use and mix various tools taken from different physicscourses as well as from other ﬁelds. We believe this makes
the course formative for students well beyond environmen-
tal physics. Finally, such a course has also been very forma-tive for us, since it challenged our understanding of physicsthrough a wide range of applications. Preparing and super-
vising this course is a great source of surprises, questions,
and motivation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
G.R. thanks C. Even and G. Blanc for many fruitful
discussions. The authors also thank all students from the
Physics of Sustainable Development course at Paris-Saclay
University for their work, ideas, enthusiasm, and feedback.Finally, the authors also thank P. Puzo for giving them the
opportunity to develop this course within the Magiste `re de
Physique Fondamentale curriculum.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the environ-
ment, sustainability, and climate change.
b)Electronic mail: claire.marrache@universite-paris-saclay.fr, ORCID:0000-0003-2842-0325.
c)Electronic mail: guillaume.roux@universite-paris-saclay.fr, ORCID:0000-0002-9294-5663.
1K. Nepra /C20s, T. Strejc ˇkov/C19a, and R. Kroufek, “Climate change education in
primary and lower secondary education: Systematic review results,”Sustainability 14(22), 14913 (2022).2D. F. Lawson, K. T. Stevenson, M. N. Peterson, S. J. Carrier, R. L. Strnad,
and E. Seekamp, “Children can foster climate change concern among theirparents,” Nat. Clim. Change 9(6), 458–462 (2019).
3M. Ojala, A. Cunsolo, C. A. Ogunbode, and J. Middleton, “Anxiety,
worry, and grief in a time of environmental and climate crisis: A narrativereview,” Annu. Rev. Environ. Resources 46(1), 35–58 (2021).
4See supplementary material online for a set of exercises and problems
which can be studied in class or given as homework or exams, as well athe lecture notes for the sustainable building design part of the course.
5J. Lourtioz, J. Lecomte, S. Laval-Szopa, C. Even-Beaudoin, and G. Roux,Enjeux de la Transition /C19Ecologique: Enseigner la Transition /C19Ecologique
Aux /C19Etudiants de Licence /C18a L’universit /C19e(EDP Sciences, Les Ulis, 2021).
6Y. C¸engel and A. Ghajar, Heat and Mass Transfer , 6th ed., Si Units
(McGraw-Hill Education, New York, 2020).
7Each group then presents its ﬁndings to the class. The aim of this activityis to have them compare different climates, while learning to look formeteorological data and to present them in a clear and meaningful way.
8Ipcc reports, <https://www.ipcc.ch/reports/ >, accessed on November 30,
2022.
9K. Forinash and B. Whitten, “Resource letter tep-1: Resources for teachingenvironmental physics,” Am. J. Phys. 87(6), 421–432 (2019).
10W. Steffen, W. Broadgate, L. Deutsch, O. Gaffney, and C. Ludwig, “The
trajectory of the anthropocene: The great acceleration,” Anthropocene
Rev.2(1), 81–98 (2015).
11J. Fressoz and C. Bonneuil, L’/C19Ev/C19enement Anthropoce `ne. La Terre,
L’histoire et Nous: La Terre, L’histoire et Nous , Points Histoire ( /C19Editions
Points, Paris, 2016).
12E. Ellis and E. Ellis, Anthropocene: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford U.
P., Oxford, 2018).
13A. Dolman and H. Dolman, Biogeochemical Cycles and Climate (Oxford
U. P., Oxford, 2019).
14M. M /C19elie`res and C. Mar /C19echal, Climate Change: Past, Present, and Future
(Wiley, New York, 2015).
15D. Archer, Global Warming: Understanding the Forecast , 2nd ed. (Wiley,
New York, 2011).
16R. Delmas, G. M /C19egie, and J.-H. Puech, Physique et Chimie de
L’atmosphe `re, Coll. /C19Echelles (Belin, Paris, 2005).
17S. E. Schwartz, “Resource letter GECC-1: The greenhouse effect and cli-
mate change: Earth’s natural greenhouse effect,” Am. J. Phys. 86(8),
565–576 (2018).
18S. E. Schwartz, “Resource letter GECC-2: The greenhouse effect and cli-mate change: The intensiﬁed greenhouse effect,” Am. J. Phys. 86(9),
645–656 (2018).
19D. MacKay, Sustainable Energy: Without the Hot Air , Without the Hot
Air Series (UIT, Cambridge, 2009).
20R. L. Jaffe and W. Taylor, The Physics of Energy (Cambridge U. P.,
Cambridge, 2018).
21See<https://jancovici.com/ >.
22V. Smil, Energy and Civilization: A History (MIT Press, Cambridge,
2018).
23B. Alcott, “Jevons’ paradox,” Ecological Econ. 54(1), 9–21 (2005).
24G. C. Unruh, “Understanding carbon lock-in,” Energy Policy 28(12),
817–830 (2000).
25G. Kallis, Degrowth, Economy, Key Ideas (Agenda Publishing, Liverpool,
2018).
26A. Valero, A. Valero, and G. Calvo, The Material Limits of Energy
Transition: Thanatia (Springer International Publishing, Berlin, 2021).
27L. Testot, Cataclysmes: Une Histoire Environnementale de L’humanit /C19e,
Histoire Payot (Payot, Paris, 2017).
28J. Lundquist, D. Anderton, and D. Yaukey, Demography: The Study of
Human Population (Waveland Press, Incorporated, Illinois, 2015).
29S. Harper, Demography: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford U. P., Oxford,
2018).
30J. V/C19eron, D/C19emographie et /C19Ecologie , Collection Repe `res: Ecologie (La
D/C19ecouverte, Paris, 2013).
31<https://ourworldindata.org/how-urban-is-the-world >, accessed on
November 22, 2022.
32<https://population.un.org/wup/maps/ >, accessed on November 22, 2022.
33<https://globalabc.org/resources/publications/2020-global-status-report-
buildings-and-construction >, accessed on November 22, 2022.
34<https://ourworldindata.org/plastic-pollution\#which-sectors-produce-the-
most-plastic >, accessed on November 22, 2022.
35OECD, Global Material Resources Outlook to 2060 - Economic Drivers
and Environmental Consequences (OECD, Berlin, 2018).
674 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Marrache-Kikuchi et al. 674 04 October 2023 22:55:56
36<https://sandcrisis.weebly.com/economic-impact.html >, accessed on
November 22, 2022.
37The great sand grab, <https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/02/02/sand-mining-
environment-climate-crisis-dredging-maﬁa/ >, accessed on November 22,
2022.
38Container temporary housing, <https://arquitecturaviva.com/works/viv-
iendas-temporales-container-3 >, accessed on November 28, 2022.
39Driveline studios, <https://lot-ek.com/DRIVELINES-STUDIOS >,
accessed on November 28, 2022.
40Smog free tower, <https://www.studioroosegaarde.net/project/smog-free-
tower>, accessed on November 28, 2022.
41The city tree, <https://greencitysolutions.de/en/citytree/ >, accessed on
November 28, 2022.
42How a poem removed two tonnes of nitrogen oxide from the surroundingenvironment, <https://theconversation.com/how-a-poem-removed-two-tonnes-
of-nitrogen-oxide-from-the-surrounding-environment-72013 >, accessed on
November 28, 2022.
43Natural water retention measures, <http://nwrm.eu/ >, accessed on
November 28, 2022.
44B. Goldstein, M. Hauschild, J. Fern /C19andez, and M. Birkved, “Urban versus
conventional agriculture, taxonomy of resource proﬁles: A review,”
Agron. Sustainable Develop. 36(1), 1–19 (2016).
45V. Brophy and J. O. Lewis, A Green Vitruvius: Principles and Practice of
Sustainable Architectural Design (Routledge, Beijing, 2012).
46During this activity, students often choose to investigate the hometown of
one group member. When they present their work to the class, this results
in a large variety of locations, which is a way of promoting diversity.
47B. A. Paule, F. Flourentzou, M. Bauer, and S. Pantet, “How current trendsin the design of facades inﬂuence the functional quality of interior spaces,”
inProceedings of International Conference CISBAT 2015 Future
Buildings and Districts Sustainability from Nano to Urban Scale, CONF
(LESO-PB, EPFL, 2015), pp. 119–124.
48S. Gafﬁn, M. Imhoff, C. Rosenzweig, R. Khanbilvardi, A. Pasqualini, A.
Kong, D. Grillo, A. Freed, D. Hillel, and E. Hartung, “Bright is the new
black—Multi-year performance of high-albedo roofs in an urban climate,”
Environ. Res. Lett. 7(1), 014029 (2012).
49P. Chastas, T. Theodosiou, and D. Bikas, “Embodied energy in residential
buildings-towards the nearly zero energy building: A literature review,”
Build. Environ. 105, 267–282 (2016).
50L. F. Cabeza, C. Barreneche, L. Mir /C19o, J. M. Morera, E. Bartol /C19ı, and A. I.
Fern/C19andez, “Low carbon and low embodied energy materials in buildings:
A review,” Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 23, 536–542 (2013).
51M. K. Dixit, J. L. Fern /C19andez-Sol /C19ıs, S. Lavy, and C. H. Culp,
“Identiﬁcation of parameters for embodied energy measurement: A litera-
ture review,” Energy Buildings 42(8), 1238–1247 (2010).
52Aashish Sharma, Abhishek Saxena, Muneesh Sethi, Venu Shree, and
Varun, “Life cycle assessment of buildings: A review,” Renewable
Sustainable Energy Rev. 15(1), 871–875 (2011).
53T. Ramesh, R. Prakash, and K. Shukla, “Life cycle energy analysis of
buildings: An overview,” Energy Buildings 42(10), 1592–1600 (2010).
54We restrict ourselves to locally implementable energy sources and chose
not to discuss hydroelectric or nuclear power, for instance.
55Guyaju and the Loess Plateau in China, Matmata in Tunisia (which fea-tured in some Star Wars movies), or Petra in Jordan have examples ofsuch troglodyte houses. The Lalibela Church in Ethiopia and the Chand
Baori well in India are magniﬁcent historical examples of such an architec-ture. The Villa Vals (Switzerland) designed by Bjarne Mastenbroek, the
St€adel Museum (Germany) designed by Schneider þSchumacher, the
Earthscraper project (Mexico) by KNKR Aquitectura, or one of EwhaWomans University’s buildings (South Korea) designed by DominiquePerrault are more contemporary examples.
56S.-Y. Song, J.-H. Song, and J.-H. Lim, “Effectiveness of a thermal laby-
rinth ventilation system using geothermal energy: A case study of an edu-
cational facility in South Korea,” Energy Sustainable Develop. 23,
150–164 (2014).
57IEA, Technology Roadmap - Energy-Efﬁcient Buildings: Heating and
Cooling Equipment (OECD/IEA, Berlin, 2011).
58J. Sobstyl, T. Emig, M. A. Qomi, F.-J. Ulm, and R.-M. Pellenq, “Role of
city texture in urban heat islands at nighttime,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 120(10),
108701 (2018).
59R. Fitria, D. Kim, J. Baik, and M. Choi, “Impact of biophysical mecha-nisms on urban heat island associated with climate variation and urbanmorphology,” Sci. Rep. 9(1), 19503 (2019).
60W. J. Gonz /C19alez-Espada, L. A. Bryan, and N.-H. Kang, “The intriguing
physics inside an igloo,” Phys. Educ. 36(4), 290–292 (2001).
61Igloo wikipedia entry, <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Igloo >, accessed on
November 29, 2022.
62Ice hotel - how does it work, <https://www.icehotel.com/how-does-it-
work-practical-info >, accessed on November 29, 2022.
63E. Mangematin, G. Pandraud, and D. Roux, “Quick measurements of
energy efﬁciency of buildings,” C. R. Phys. 13(4), 383–390 (2012).
64F. Jomehzadeh, P. Nejat, J. K. Calautit, M. B. M. Yusof, S. A. Zaki, B. R.
Hughes, and M. N. A. W. M. Yazid, “A review on windcatcher for passivecooling and natural ventilation in buildings, part 1: Indoor air quality andthermal comfort assessment,” Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev. 70,
736–756 (2017).
65A. Abdeen, A. A. Serageldin, M. G. Ibrahim, A. El-Zafarany, S.
Ookawara, and R. Murata, “Solar chimney optimization for enhancingthermal comfort in egypt: An experimental and numerical study,” Sol.
Energy 180, 524–536 (2019).
66H. Pochee, J. Gunstone, and O. Wilton, New Insight on Passive Ice
Making and Seasonal Storage of the Iranian Yakhchal and Their Potentialfor Contemporary Applications (NCEUB, London, 2017).
67M. Zandieh, I. Khaleghi, and R. Rahgoshay, “Iranian vernacular architec-
ture: Notable example of a thermal mass,” Int. J. Architec. Eng. UrbanPlan. 22(1), 51–59 (2012).
68During the projects, students often like to tackle a subject that is
relevant in their life. They are sometimes inspired by building
techniques or sustainable solutions that are used in their home countriesor regions. Explaining this to their classmates favors interculturalexchanges.
69Student projects that the authors agreed to publicize will be accessiblethrough the course’s webpage: <http://lptms.u-psud.fr/wiki-cours/
index.php/Physics_of_sustainable_development >.
70M. Caprais, U. Pensec, O. Shviro, and H. Zeyen, “Application of the heat
equation to the study of underground temperature,” Am. J. Phys.(unpublished).
675 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Marrache-Kikuchi et al. 675 04 October 2023 22:55:56
