
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| MARCH 01 2022
A new microscopic look into pressure fields and local
buoyancy 
S. Meneses João  
 ; J. P. Santos Pires  
 ; J. M. V iana Parente Lopes  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 179–186 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0060479
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Calibration apparatus for precise barometers and vacuum gauges
J. Vac. Sci. T echnol. A  (July 2004)
A Logarithmic Barometer
Rev Sci Instrum  (December 2004)
Two-Fluid Barometer as a Student Project
American Journal of Physics  (November 1955) 04 October 2023 23:03:33
A new microscopic look into pressure fields and local buoyancy
S.Meneses Jo ~ao,a)J. P . Santos Pires, and J. M. Viana Parente Lopesb)
Centro de F /C19ısica das Universidades do Minho e Porto and Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto,
Rua do Campo Alegre 687, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal
(Received 18 June 2021; accepted 12 January 2022)
Deﬁning local pressures is pivotal to understanding phenomena such as buoyancy and atmospheric
physics, which always require space-varying pressure ﬁelds to be considered. Such ﬁelds have
precise deﬁnitions within the frameworks of hydro-thermodynamics and the kinetic theory ofgases, but a pedagogical approach based on standard statistical mechanics techniques is still
lacking. In this paper, we propose a new microscopic deﬁnition of local pressure inside a classical
ﬂuid, relying upon a local barometer potential that is built into the many-particle Hamiltonian. Thissetup allows pressure to be locally deﬁned as an ensemble average of the radial force exerted by
the barometer potential on the gas’ particles. Moreover, this same framework is also employed in a
microscopic derivation of buoyancy of immersed bodies in the presence of arbitrary external ﬁelds.As instructive examples, buoyant forces are calculated for ideal ﬂuids in the presence of a uniform
force ﬁeld, in the presence of a spherical harmonic conﬁnement ﬁeld and in rotation with a
constant angular velocity.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics
Teachers. https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0060479
I. INTRODUCTION
Thermodynamics is an essential tool for understanding the
world around us, giving a self-contained yet simple descrip-tion of physical processes involving many particles, butusing a minimal number of variables. For example, tempera-
ture and pressure are pivotal concepts in the thermodynamics
of ﬂuids but are also intrinsically macroscopic, emergingonly if the number of particles is very large and maintained
in some state of equilibrium.
A connection between the basic laws that govern the
mechanics of microscopic degrees of freedom and their ther-modynamic manifestation is provided by the ediﬁce of statis-
tical physics.
1–3Simply put, the temperature of a ﬂuid
measures the mean kinetic energy per particle, while its pres-sure is the magnitude of momentum transferred (on average,per unit area, and per unit time) from the jiggling particles to
the walls of its container through random elastic collisions.
This picture provides the essential microscopic foundationsof thermodynamics, but previous investigations on physics
education
4–10have shown these concepts as difﬁcult to grasp
by most physics and engineering students, especially whenasked to provide insight on practical situations falling out-
side the scope of typical textbook examples.5,6Despite
focusing on the early undergraduate years, these studies indi-cate that deep misconceptions may arise when these concepts
are ﬁrst introduced and persist thereafter. Nevertheless, this
issue may be mitigated by providing instructors with newways of explaining these ideas and, in particular, giving awider variety of transparent examples that more clearly con-
nect to real-life situations, while retaining a simple enough
description that makes their physical interpretation as trans-parent as possible. Here, we provide such an instructive
example that describes pressure ﬁelds and buoyancy within a
canonical formulation for the equilibrium statistical mechan-ics of classical gases.
The usual textbook treatments deﬁne pressure as a global
property of any ﬂuid in equilibrium, when conﬁned to a ﬁnite
volume. In contrast, many physical phenomena depend onlocal deﬁnitions of pressure, now described by position-dependent scalar ﬁelds that permeate the whole system.
Atmospheric physics
11and hydrodynamics12are two para-
digmatic examples in which non-uniform pressure ﬁelds are
ubiquitous. A simpler example is provided by the phenome-
non of buoyancy, which relies upon unbalanced pressuresacting on different surfaces of an immersed solid body.Most commonly, this pressure gradient is induced byEarth’s gravitational ﬁeld and gives rise to familiar
Archimedes’s principle: The weight of an immersed body is
reduced by an amount that equals the weight of the dis-placed ﬂuid. However, buoyancy is a much more generalphenomenon, as space-varying pressures can be caused byany external ﬁeld acting on the ﬂuid particles. A myriad of
formal microscopic derivations,
13–18some including parti-
cle–particle interactions, as well as generalizations19–22of
Archimedes’s principle to nonstandard external ﬁelds (e.g.,centrifugal buoyancy) can be found in the literature.However, we have not found a pedagogical discussion that
illustrates how space-varying pressure ﬁelds and buoyancy
can emerge from a microscopic theory based on the stan-dard equilibrium statistical mechanics that is typicallytaught at the undergraduate level. This approach can serveas an interesting basis for practical short-term projects in
statistical physics courses that help students to build a better
intuition for the applications of the theory they are learning.
In this paper, we provide a new pedagogical application of
statistical mechanics by microscopically describing non-uniform pressure using the canonical formalism for Ninde-
pendent classical particles in a state of global thermody-namic equilibrium at temperature T. The local pressure in
the gas, PðrÞ, is probed via a localized spherical “soft-wall”
potential that gets included in the system’s Hamiltonian.This probe acts as a small barometer, whose volume coupleslinearly to the pressure in its location and, hence, deﬁnes thepressure ﬁeld at any point within the gas. With this setup, we
obtain a microscopic expression for the space-varying pres-
sure induced in the gas by an arbitrary external potential,UðrÞ. In the limit of a sufﬁciently small and hard-walled
probe, we conclude that
179 Am. J. Phys. 90(3), March 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 179 04 October 2023 23:03:33
PðrÞ¼NkBTexp /C0UðrÞ
kBT/C18/C19
ð
dð3Þr0exp /C0Uðr0Þ
kBT/C18/C19 ; (1)
which is a local version of the ideal gas law. Similarly, by
measuring the net force exerted by the thermalized gas on
the local probe, we analyze the problem of buoyancy in this
system and arrive at the fundamental relation:
BðrÞ¼/C0$PðrÞ; (2)
where BðrÞis the buoyant force per unit volume acting on a
small solid immersed in the gas at the point r. The previous
expressions are employed to derive Archimedes’s principle in
three common examples: (i) a ﬂuid under a uniform gravita-
tional ﬁeld, (ii) a gas cloud conﬁned by a spherical harmonic
potential, and (iii) a ﬂuid rotating alongside its cylindrical con-
tainer. Examples (i) and (ii) may also help clear one common
misconception about the deﬁnition of pressure: the idea that
pressure requires hand-wall conﬁnement.10Finally, we note
that both Eqs. (1)and(2)are known results from the kinetic
theory of gases, which we critically review and discuss.
II. MICROSCOPIC MODEL OF AN IDEAL GAS
Aiming at a microscopic description of a ﬂuid pressure
ﬁeld, we start with a system having a large number Nof
independent and non-relativistic classical particles of mass
m, which move within a scalar potential UðrÞ. This potential
can describe the conﬁnement of the gas particles inside a
container or reﬂect an external force ﬁeld acting globally
upon the system (e.g., a gravitational ﬁeld). In order to have
a consistent deﬁnition of a position-dependent pressure ﬁeldinside the system, one is forced to introduce some kind of
local probe, analogous to the more common use of test elec-
trical charges to deﬁne electromagnetic ﬁelds in space.
Therefore, we add to the Hamiltonian of the gas a short-
ranged perturbation potential U
pðrÞ, representing a small
spherical probe of radius R(as depicted in Fig. 1). The probe
is assumed to be centered in an arbitrary but ﬁxed position
r¼r0(where the pressure is measured), and r0¼r/C0r0is
taken to be a position vector pinned to the center of the
probe. In the limit R!0;r0deﬁnes the position in which
the local pressure is being deﬁned.
In the present context, we deﬁne the pressure at position
r0as the average normal force exerted by the gas particles
per unit area on the spherical probe. From the kinetic point
of view, this happens by means of collisions. However, a
canonical description yields any thermodynamic quantity as
the average of a microscopic observable over an ensemble of
microscopic states. In this description, one speaks of the
probability density of ﬁnding a particle at any given position.
Particles far away from the probe will not contribute to the
pressure, and particles that are deep inside the probe will
have a vanishingly small probability of being there.
Therefore, it is expected that the majority of the contribution
for the pressure will come from the region around the
probe’s surface. Then, to estimate this quantity, it is useful to
model the probe’s surface, not as a rigid spherical wall, butrather as a soft-wall potential that allows the particles to
slightly penetrate before being repelled outward. This means
that any gas particle, at a distance r
0¼jr0jfrom the probe’s
center, will feel a spherically symmetric potential,Upðr0;RÞ¼U0fr0
R/C18/C19
;r0<R;
0; r0/C21R;8
><
>:(3)
where U0measures the strength of the interaction and fðxÞis
a smooth and decreasing23function that deﬁnes the overall
shape of the soft-wall potential and satisﬁes fðxÞ! 0 and
f0ðxÞ!/C0 1a s x!1/C0, close to the surface of the sphere
(see Fig. 2(a)). Such a potential implies that the gas particles
feel a roughly uniform outward radial force inside the
sphere, but no force outside of it. With the above deﬁnitions,
the full Hamiltonian of the gas reads
Hri;pifg ;R/C0/C1¼XN
i¼1p2
i
2mþUriðÞþUpri/C0r0;R ðÞ/C18/C19
;(4)
where ðri;piÞare the phase-space coordinates of the corre-
sponding particles. Note that, for simplicity, we have consid-ered the gas to consist of monoatomic particles that have no
(active) internal degrees of freedom.
III. CANONICAL ENSEMBLE FORMULATION
Having established our working microscopic model, we are
now in the position to perform a standard statistical mechanics
analysis of this non-interacting gas. Concretely, we will work in
the canonical ensemble (at a ﬁnite temperature T¼ðbk
BÞ/C01,
where kBis the Boltzmann constant) and calculate the canonical
partition function Zstarting from the basic Hamiltonian deﬁned
in Eq. (4). In terms of relative space coordinates, r0
i, the partition
function can be expressed as the following 6 N-dimensional inte-
gral over the whole many-body phase space,
Zb;N;R ðÞ ¼ð
d3NðÞr0ð
d3NðÞpe/C0bHr0
iþr0fg ;pifg;R ðÞ
N!h3N;(5)
where h3Nis the conventional statistical measure in classical
phase-space and the 1 =N!factor accounts for particle indis-
tinguishability and corrects the Gibbs paradox. Since we are
Fig. 1. Sketch of the physical situation, including a “barometer” at r0
described by potential energy UpðrÞ. The forces Fexerted by the barometer
are a measure of the local pressure of the ﬂuid.
180 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Meneses Jo ~ao, Santos Pires, and Viana Parente Lopes 180 04 October 2023 23:03:33
considering non-interacting particles, the partition function
naturally factorizes as a product of Nsimilar single-particle
terms. In addition, we can also easily integrate over themomenta (3 Nindependent Gaussian degrees of freedom)
which yields
Zb;N;R ðÞ ¼1
N!k3N
Tð
d3ðÞr0e/C0bUr0þr0ðÞ þUpr0;RðÞ ðÞ/C20/C21N
;(6)
where kT¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
bh2=ð2pmÞp
is the thermal wavelength of a
classical monoatomic particle. In the hard-probe limit (i.e.,U
0!1 ), the integrand becomes exponentially small inside
the small probe’s volume ( v), and thus, the integrals of Eq.
(6)can be safely restricted to its outside volume ( /C22v, the com-
plement of v), where Upðr0;RÞ¼0. This further simpliﬁes
the expression of Zas follows:
Zb;NðÞ ¼1
N!k3N
Tð
/C22vdð3Þr0e/C0bUr0þr0ðÞ/C20/C21N
: (7)
From the partition function of Eq. (7), one can readily calcu-
late the Helmholtz free energy A¼/C0 kBTlnZand determine
the thermodynamic properties of this system in equilibrium.This quantity is expressed as
Ab;N;v ðÞ ¼/C01
bNlogð
dð3Þr0e/C0bUr0þr0ðÞ/C18/C20
/C0ð
vdð3Þr0e/C0bUr0þr0ðÞ/C19
/C0log N!k3N ðÞ/C21
;(8)
w h e r ew eh a v ec o n ﬁ n e dt h ew h o l ec o n t r i b u t i o nf r o mt h el o c a l
pressure probe to the second integral. Moreover, as the ﬁrstintegral in Eq. (8)extends over the entire space, it can be sim-
pliﬁed by changing the integration variable back to the abso-
lute position ( r). For the last term, log ðN!Þcan be
approximated using Stirling’s formula. Finally, in the limit of a
point-like probe, the second integral scales as v, and therefore,
one may expand the logarithm to ﬁrst order in v, yielding
Ab;N;v ðÞ ¼/C0N
blogeVeff
Nk3N/C18/C19
þvN
be/C0bUr0ðÞ
Veff; (9)
where we have deﬁned the effective volume of the system as
Veff¼Ðd3re/C0bUðrÞ. When UðrÞis taken to be a hard-wallpotential (for example, a box that conﬁnes the gas), Veffcoin-
cides with the container’s volume V, and the familiar notion
of intensivity is recovered.
In Eq. (9), the ﬁrst term is simply the Helmholtz free
energy of a noninteracting monoatomic gas conﬁned insidea container of volume V
eff. In turn, the last term is propor-
tional to the volume of the small probing sphere, with aposition-dependent coefﬁcient. Here, it is important toremark that the thermodynamic deﬁnition of the pressure ofa conﬁned gas is the volume derivative of A, keeping band
Nconstant. Global pressure is the thermodynamic variable
conjugate to the whole volume. As will be microscopicallyderived, a similar relation holds for the local pressure atpoint r
0, which will be the conjugate variable to the volume
of a small probe placed at that position. A cartoon of this iss h o w ni nF i g . 2(b).
IV. STATISTICAL DEFINITION OF A FLUID
PRESSURE FIELD
In principle, all equilibrium thermodynamic quantities
are encapsulated in the thermodynamic potential Aðb;N;vÞ.
In this section, we will relate the familiar kinetic theorydeﬁnition of pressure to the free energy, completing our sta-tistical mechanics derivation of the local pressure ﬁeld.Namely, we wish to derive the average inward force exertedon the walls of the spherical probe by the colliding gas par-ticles. Applying Newton’s third law, this quantity is simply
the opposite to the force caused by the sphere’s soft-wall
potential, U
pðrÞ, on any given particle penetrating its
surface.
Considering the ith particle, it will only feel a force due
to the probe when lying inside its radius. Then, theforce will point radially outward and be given by F
i
¼/C0@=@r0
iUpðr0
i;RÞ^ri0, where ^r0
iis the unit vector correspond-
ing to r0
i. Then, the contribution to the inward pressure acting
upon the spherical probe is ð/C0FiÞ/C1ð /C0 ^r0
iÞand, hence, the
pressure due to the entire gas is simply
P¼1
4pR2XN
i¼1Fi/C1^r0
i*+
; (10)
where h/C1 /C1 /C1i is a canonical ensemble average. This ensemble
average can be formally written as
Fig. 2. (a) Soft-wall potential of the probe for increasing values of U0. The dashed lines are linear approximations near the surface, i.e., r¼R. (b) Cartoon that
relates changes in Helmholtz free energy to the variations in the probe’s volume. A decrease in this volume increases the volume accessible to the gas’ par-
ticles, decreasing its Helmholtz free energy.
181 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Meneses Jo ~ao, Santos Pires, and Viana Parente Lopes 181 04 October 2023 23:03:33
XN
i¼1Fi/C1^r0
i*+
¼ð
d3NðÞr0ð
d3NðÞpXN
i¼1/C0@Upr0
i;R/C0/C1
@r0
i"#
/C2e/C0bHr0
iþr0fg ;pifg;R ðÞ
N!h3NZb;N;R ðÞ; (11)
where Zis the partition function of Eqs. (5)–(7) .
Now, we can consider the rigid-probe limit ( U0!1 )i n
which the function ð@Up=@r0Þexp½/C0bUpðr0;RÞ/C138becomes
sharply peaked in the vicinity of r0¼R. In addition, as shown in
Appendix A ,w ea l s oh a v e Rð@Up=@r0Þ¼/C0 r0ð@Up=@RÞinside
this integral, which leads to the relation
@Up
@r0e/C0bUp¼/C0@Up
@Re/C0bUp¼1
b@
@Re/C0bUp; (12)
and using Eq. (11), it can be easily shown that
XN
i¼1Fi/C1^r0
i*+
¼/C0@
@R1
blogZb;N;R ðÞ ; (13)
and, so the pressure (force per unit surface) exerted on the
spherical probe is simply
Pðr0Þ¼1
4pR2@
@RAðT;N;r0;vÞ
¼@
@vAT;N;r0;v ðÞ ; (14)
where r0andv¼4
3pR3are the position and volume of the probe,
respectively. Note that Eq. (14)matches almost exactly the ther-
modynamic deﬁnition of pressure, being the change of theHelmholtz free energy upon an inﬁnitesimal change to the volumeexcluded by the spherical probe. The only difference is in thesign. Typically, when a gas is contained within a macroscopic vol-ume V, any isothermal increase in this volume leads to a decrease
in pressure. Nevertheless, if the probe’s volume vincreases in our
setup, this results in a diminishing available volume for the gas,thus increasing the pressure. Despite the similarities to the usualcase, it is important to mention that now the pressure is a functionof the probe’s position r
0and, therefore, it is a locally deﬁned
quantity in the limit when v!0. Using the result obtained in Eq.
(9), our expression for the pressure in r0is given by
Pðr0Þ¼N
bVeffe/C0bUr0ðÞ; (15)
which can be easily expressed in terms of the equilibrium
local density of particles, nðr0Þ(seeAppendix B ),
Pr0ðÞ¼kBTneqr0ðÞ: (16)
This equation now takes a very recognizable form—it is a
local version of the ideal gas law. Furthermore, we alsoremark that Eq. (16) not only reduces to the (global) ideal
gas law, in the absence of external forces, but also reprodu-ces the barometric formula, Pðx;y;zÞ¼P
0e/C0z=z0, for a uni-
form gravitational ﬁeld UðzÞ¼mgz(see Sec. VI A ).
V. MICROSCOPIC DERIVATION OF THE LOCAL
ARCHIMEDES’S BUOYANCY PRINCIPLE
If the pressure inside a ﬂuid is not uniform, then an
immersed body will be subject to a net force, historicallyknown as buoyant force. Physically, this happens because
the pressures acting upon different surfaces of the object arenot balanced and add up to a net force that points in the
direction of the lower pressure. In this section, we will use
our microscopic theory to derive this buoyant force in thecontext of a general ideal ﬂuid subject to an external forceﬁeld. Namely, we will focus on deriving an expression for
the buoyant force acting on the spherical probe, in the limit
of hard-walls and small volume, as a function of its locationinside the ﬂuid.
Evoking Newton’s third law once again, the force exerted
by the ith particle on the sphere is /C0F
i, with the total force
being the ensemble average of the cumulative force due to
all the particles, i.e., Fb¼h /C0PN
i¼1Fii. Considering the gas
to be in thermodynamic equilibrium, we arrive at the follow-ing expression:
F
bðr0Þ¼ð
d3NðÞr0ð
d3NðÞpXN
i¼1@Upr0
i;R/C0/C1
@r0
i^r0
i"#
/C2e/C0bHr0
iþr0fg ;pifg;R ðÞ
N!h3NZb;N;R ðÞ: (17)
Since the particles are non-interacting, Eq. (17)can be fur-
ther simpliﬁed to
Fbðr0Þ¼/C0N
bVeffð
dð3Þr0e/C0bUr0þr0ðÞ^r0@
@r0e/C0bUpr0;RðÞ:(18)
Finally, we may consider the rigid-probe limit ( U0!1 ),
such that the integral in the numerator of Eq. (18) becomes
highly localized around the surface of the sphere. Then, wecan approximate @=@r
0expð/C0bUpðr0;RÞÞ /C25 dðr0/C0RÞ(see
Appendix A for further details) and perform a gradient
expansion of exp ð/C0bUðrÞÞ, i.e.,
e/C0bUr0þr0ðÞ/C25e/C0bUr0ðÞ1/C0br0/C1$Ujr0/C2/C3: (19)
This way, the average force reduces to the much simpler
form,
Fbðr0Þ¼/C0N
bVeffe/C0bUr0ðÞ
/C2ð
dð3Þr0dr0/C0R ðÞ r0/C0br0/C1$Ujr0/C2/C3: (20)
The physical interpretation of both terms in Eq. (20) is
very clear. The ﬁrst term corresponds to a uniform pressure
ﬁeld and integrates to zero. As expected, in the absence of
external force ﬁelds, the pressure is uniform across the sys-tem and does not yield any buoyant force. In contrast, thesecond term is proportional to $Uj
r0, which measures the
effect of the lowest order inhomogeneity in the ﬁeld at r0,
i.e., a uniform pressure gradient. For evaluating this term,
the Dirac- dcan be directly employed by recognizing that
r0¼R^r0, giving a net force
Fbðr0Þ¼neqr0ðÞð
dð3Þr0^r0dr0/C0R ðÞ R^r0/C1$Ujr0hi
;(21)
on the probe, where nðr0Þis the equilibrium density of par-
ticles (as deﬁned in Appendix B ). Finally, by using the iden-
tityÐd3r0^r0dðr0/C0RÞ½u/C1^r0/C138¼u4
3pR2, valid for a general
182 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Meneses Jo ~ao, Santos Pires, and Viana Parente Lopes 182 04 October 2023 23:03:33
three-dimensional vector u, we arrive at the simple
expression,
Fbðr0Þ¼neqr0ðÞv$Ujr0; (22)
which shows the local buoyant force to be proportional to
the local value of the external force ﬁeld. This expression
allows us to deﬁne a local buoyant force ﬁeld (per unit vol-ume), Bðr
0Þ¼Fbðr0Þ=v, and using Eq. (16), we arrive at a
local form of Archimedes’s principle,
BðrÞ¼/C0$PðrÞ; (23)
which is valid for any pressure ﬁeld. This shows that the
pressure ﬁeld is the effective scalar potential associated with
the buoyancy force. Before moving on to some speciﬁc
examples of generalized buoyancy laws, we remark that
VBðr0Þis the buoyancy force that acts on small immersed
body of volume V, independently of its shape. This conclu-
sion holds if the body is smaller than the scale of space-
variation in the pressure ﬁeld. Nevertheless, for larger bod-ies, the full buoyancy force can be obtained by integrating
BðrÞin its volume, as shown rigorously in Lima et al.22In
this sense, BðrÞcan be seen as a local force ﬁeld that acts on
point-like immersed bodies and is subject to a superposition
principle.
VI. ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES OF GENERALIZED
BUOYANCY LAWS
We have obtained a general expression for the buoyant
force acting on a body immersed inside an ideal ﬂuid under
arbitrary external force ﬁelds. Now, we will apply it to spe-
ciﬁc examples intended to further elucidate the physical con-
tent of Eq. (23) and provide non-standard examples of
buoyancy. As announced in the abstract, we will determine
the pressure and buoyant force ﬁelds in three paradigmatic
cases: (i) a ﬂuid under a uniform gravitational ﬁeld, (ii) a gas
cloud conﬁned by a three-dimensional harmonic potential,
and (iii) a rotating ﬂuid inside a cylinder.
A. Buoyancy in a uniform gravitational field
The formulas derived before do not require any container
for the pressure ﬁeld to be well-deﬁned. In fact, we can use
any generic conﬁning potential in its place. The simplest
nontrivial case is that of a gas at uniform temperature Ton a
uniform gravitational ﬁeld, i.e., UðrÞ¼UðzÞ¼mgz. To sim-
plify the analysis, we will conﬁne the gas to lie inside a col-
umn with a base area Aand a semi-inﬁnite height ( z>0).
The equilibrium density of particles is found to be neqðzÞ
¼N=ðAnÞexpð/C0z=nÞwith n¼ðbmgÞ/C01. The pressure fol-
lows the barometric law PðzÞ¼P0e/C0z=n, where P0¼Nmg=A
is the pressure at ground level z¼0 (blue curve in Fig. 3).
Finally, the buoyant force ﬁeld can be easily obtained from
Eq.(23), yielding
BzðÞ¼P0
ne/C0z=n^z: (24)
This example can be made even more concrete by calculat-
ing the buoyant force, which is exerted on a human being on
the surface of the Earth. For that purpose, we estimate n/C25
8800 m using the average mass of an air molecule(4:8/C210/C026kg) and a temperature of 300 K. Since nis
much larger than the average human height, BðzÞcan be con-
sidered constant across the person’s volume V¼6
/C210/C02m3, such that the total buoyancy force is
Btot¼VBð0Þ. Finally, using a pressure at sea level of 105N/
m2(1 atm), we obtain a buoyancy force of 0.7 N. This is a
minor effect that accounts for a reduction of about 0.1% in a
human’s perceived weight.
B. Buoyancy in spherical harmonic confinement
Consider now the same gas, but under a harmonic poten-
tialUðrÞ¼1
2kr2. Note that, despite allowing the gas particles
to be located anywhere in space, this potential naturally
deﬁnes an effective volume given by Veff¼ð2p=ðkbÞÞ3=2.
The pressure ﬁeld is then shown to have a Gaussian radial
proﬁle, PðrÞ¼P0exp/C03r2
2n2/C16/C17
, with a characteristic width
n¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3=ðkbÞp
and a maximum P0¼N=ðbVeffÞ(orange
curve in Fig. 3). Similarly, the buoyant ﬁeld is obtained,
BrðÞ¼3P0
n2rexp /C03r2
2n2 !
^r; (25)
being naturally directed in the outward radial direction, in
opposition to the conﬁning force.
C. Rotating fluid—centrifugal buoyancy
As a last example, we consider the case of buoyancy
inside an ideal ﬂuid conﬁned to a cylinder of radius nand
length L, rotating with angular velocity Xaround its revolu-
tion axis. In the rotating reference frame, the ﬂuid is subject
to a centrifugal potential UðqÞ¼/C01
2mX2q2(where qis the
radial cylindrical coordinate) and a conﬁning hard-wall
potential. In this case, one can then deﬁne an effective vol-
ume, Veff¼2pL=ðbmX2Þ½expð1=2bmX2n2Þ/C01/C138, such that
the pressure proﬁle is PðqÞ¼N=ðbVeffÞexpð1=2bmX2q2Þ
inside the cylinder, and 0 outside (green curve in Fig. 3).
Correspondingly, the buoyant force ﬁeld is
BqðÞ¼/C0N
VeffbmX2qexp1
2bmX2q2/C18/C19
^q; (26)
Fig. 3. Equilibrium pressure proﬁles for the three examples considered. The
curves are normalized with respect to their respective maxima, and the radii
are normalized to the characteristic lengths nfor each system (deﬁned in the
main text).
183 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Meneses Jo ~ao, Santos Pires, and Viana Parente Lopes 183 04 October 2023 23:03:33
which is now directed inward. As in the previous situations,
the natural tendency of a buoyant force is to balance the
existing centrifugal force acting upon any object ﬂoatinginside.
Before moving on to the discussion, we remark that
the previous cases involved potentials that are able
to conﬁne the ﬂuid to a ﬁnite volume, i.e., V
effis ﬁnite.
However, there are important cases where the potential
is non-conﬁning, such as the 1 =rgravitational potential
of a spherical mass, which have an ill-deﬁned equilibriumparticle density in the absence of inter-particle
interactions.
VII. DISCUSSION AND ALTERNATIVE
DERIVATIONS
Our microscopic theory of space-varying pressure ﬁelds
forced us to include a “soft-wall” localized potential in the
many-particle Hamiltonian, in order to employ canonicalensemble averaging methods. In the end, by taking the limit
of an impenetrable probe, we have obtained Eqs. (16) and
(23), which are our central (and remarkably simple) results.
This derivation is mathematically involved but entirely based
on the usual methods of equilibrium statistical mechanics.
However, it is important to remark that simpler approachesare known to obtain these same expressions. In the case of
uniform ﬁelds, it was even shown that Archimedes’s princi-
ple emerges out of a straightforward argument of mechanicalenergy minimization.
24
A more general approach can be taken by employing
kinetic theory of gases, which deﬁnes the local pressure PðrÞ
by means of a (ﬁctitious) surface that is hit by the gas par-ticles from one side (depicted in Fig. 4). For elastic particle-
surface collisions, the local pressure is the rate of momentum
transferred to the unit area, which is always normal to thesurface. In local equilibrium, it also easily shown that theideal gas law is veriﬁed pointwise (Eq. (16)). At any rate,
once a local pressure ﬁeld has been deﬁned, the buoyant
force is obtained by integrating it over the immersed body’ssurface. Then, an application of the divergence
theorem
22,25,26
/H20860SPðrÞ^ndS¼/C0ððð
Vdð3Þr$P (27)
directly leads to the integral form of Eq. (23). Furthermore,
in Lima et al. ,22it is shown that under hydrostatic condi-
tions— rPðrÞ¼neqðrÞgðrÞ—the right-hand side of Eq. (27)
is the (perceived) weight of the displaced ﬂuid in a nonuni-form force ﬁeld.
This less involved approach leads to the same fundamental
equations as our ensemble-average calculation. However, thelatter remains an instructive way of observing the emergenceof pressure and buoyancy from a microscopic theory. On theone hand, it treats the problem within the scope of the canon-ical ensemble formulation, which is recognizable by anyonefamiliar with basic statistical mechanics. In addition, ourstarting point [Eqs. (10) and(17)] is amenable to controlled
approximations, which can, in principle, allow to considersome inter-particle interaction effects as well as circumstan-ces in which the probe’s walls are not impenetrable (e.g., ifthe surface can capture particles). On the other hand, even
when the kinetic and ensemble approaches yield identical
equations for PðrÞandBðrÞ, the equilibrium statistical prob-
lem remains a separate issue in the kinetic approach, beingencapsulated in the undetermined local density of particlesn
eqðrÞ.
VIII. SUMMARY AND PEDAGOGICAL
FRAMEWORK
Many real-life physical situations, ranging from atmo-
spheric physics to buoyant forces, can only be described bymeans of space-dependent pressure ﬁelds, which are non-trivial thermodynamic concepts to introduce from a micro-scopic point-of-view.
In this paper, we provided a new, simple view of the
microscopic deﬁnition of local pressure inside an ideal ﬂuidwhen acted upon by an arbitrary external force ﬁeld. Relyingon a standard canonical ensemble formulation, we studied a
monoatomic classical gas of independent particles moving in
an external scalar potential. The local value of the pressure isthen deﬁned by adding a short-ranged localized potential tothe many-particle Hamiltonian, so as to provide a point-likebarometer that can probe the pressure at any given location.Using this setup, we derived closed-form formulas for thepressure ﬁeld and buoyant force acting on any small bodyimmersed in the ﬂuid. In the limit of a small (compared tothe variation scale of the external force ﬁeld) and impenetra-ble barometer, we arrived at the local version of the ideal gaslaw that relates the local pressure to the equilibrium densityof gas particles at that point and also concluded that thebuoyant force per unit volume on a small body is simplygiven by the gradient of the pressure ﬁeld. These resultsmatch the ones obtained from an approach based on the
kinetic theory of gases, and their applicability was illustrated
in three paradigmatic examples: (i) a ﬂuid under a uniformgravitational ﬁeld, (ii) a gas conﬁned by a spherical har-monic potential, and (iii) a rotating ﬂuid.
The treatment of non-uniform pressure and buoyancy pre-
sented here can be an interesting pedagogical resource forboth instructors and students at the advanced undergraduatelevel. In spite of being more mathematically involved than
Fig. 4. Representation of the rigid closed surface enclosing a small ﬂoating
volume.
184 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Meneses Jo ~ao, Santos Pires, and Viana Parente Lopes 184 04 October 2023 23:03:33
other approaches (reviewed in Sec. VII), ours only resorts to
standard methods of statistical mechanics and, thus, reinfor-
ces the formal theory. Moreover, from a pedagogical stand-
point, the ideas of this work can be used by instructors as abasis of short-term projects in which their students can gobeyond traditional textbook materials and apply their knowl-
edge of classical statistical mechanics to concrete problems
involving nonuniform equilibrium states and their conse-quences for the ﬂoatation of small objects. Finally, it is worth
remarking that we have employed this as a proposal for a
problem as part of the 2021 edition of the internationalPhysics competition PLANCKS.
27The participants’
responses revealed a very rich exploration of the physical
content and led to intuitive discussions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge ﬁnancial support by the
Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT)within the Strategic Funding UIDB/04650/2020 and
COMPETE 2020 program in FEDER component (European
Union) through Project No. POCI-01-0145-FEDER-028887.S.M.J. and J.P.S.P. were further supported by FCT underPh.D. Grant Nos. PD/BD/142798/2018 and PD/BD/142774/
2018, respectively. The authors further thank Professor J. M.
B. Lopes dos Santos, J. Gonc ¸alo Roboredo, and J. Matos for
fruitful discussions. A grateful acknowledgement is also
made to the comments and useful criticism of the
anonymous referees, in particular, by calling our attention tothe aforementioned kinetic approach.
APPENDIX A: USEFUL IDENTITIES WITH DIRAC- d
FUNCTIONS
In this section, we delve into more detail about the trick
used for the derivation of the local pressure and the buoyantforce ﬁeld in Secs. IVandV. Speciﬁcally, we want to show
that
@e/C0bUp
@r¼/C0@e/C0bUp
@R; (A1)
under reasonable assumptions. Recalling Eq. (3), we begin
by noting that
@Upr;RðÞ
@re/C0bUpr;RðÞ¼/C01
b@
@re/C0bUpr;RðÞ: (A2)
This function is highly localized around the surface of the
sphere r¼R. Let us analyze how this object acts inside the
integrals we typically ﬁnd
ð1
0drg rðÞ@
@re/C0bUpr;RðÞ; (A3)
where gðrÞis assumed to decay exponentially to zero as r
increases. Such is the case when gðrÞ¼e/C0bVðrÞ. Using inte-
gration by parts
ð1
0dr@
@re/C0bUpr;RðÞ/C20/C21
grðÞ
¼ð1
0dr@
@rgrðÞe/C0bUpr;RðÞhi
/C0ð1
0dre/C0bUpr;RðÞ@
@rgrðÞ;
(A4)the ﬁrst term evaluates to zero because gð1Þ ¼ 0b y
assumption and e/C0bUpðr;RÞ¼0 when r<Rin the hard wall
limit U0!1 . In this same limit, the second term simpliﬁes
to
ð1
0dre/C0bUpr;RðÞ@
@rgrðÞ¼ð1
Rdr@
@rgrðÞ¼/C0gRðÞ:(A5)
Thus far, we have shown that
ð1
0drg rðÞ@
@re/C0bUr;RðÞ¼gRðÞ (A6)
for an arbitrary well-behaved function gðrÞ. Then, we can
say that @=@rexp½/C0bUpðr;RÞ/C138 ¼ dðr/C0RÞunder these con-
ditions. Using the fact that r¼Runder the action of
dðr/C0RÞ, we get that
@e/C0bUp
@r¼dr/C0RðÞ ¼dr/C0RðÞR
r¼R
r@e/C0bUp
@r: (A7)
Finally, using the fact that Rð@Up=@r0Þ¼/C0 r0ð@Up=@RÞ, the
original assertion
@e/C0bUp
@r¼/C0@e/C0bUp
@R(A8)
immediately follows.
APPENDIX B: EQUILIBRIUM DENSITY OF
PARTICLES IN THE PRESENCE OF AN EXTERNAL
FIELD
In this appendix, we derive the equilibrium density of par-
ticles for an ideal classical gas under the inﬂuence of an arbi-trary scalar potential UðrÞ. When deriving the expressions of
the pressure and buoyant force ﬁelds, this is a necessary
quantity that appears in all the expressions. To be precise,
this quantity is found by evaluating the statistical average of
the following characteristic function:
nrðÞ¼X
N
i¼1dr/C0ri ðÞ : (B1)
Considering only the gas subject to an external potential
(with no barometer present), its average in the canonical
ensemble is
neqrðÞ¼ð
d3NðÞr0ð
d3NðÞpX
idr/C0ri ðÞ e/C0bP
jðp2
j=2mÞþUðrjÞ ðÞ
ð
d3NðÞr0ð
d3NðÞpe/C0bP
jðp2
j=2mÞþUðrjÞ ðÞ;
(B2)
which reduces to
neqrðÞ¼N
Veffe/C0bUrðÞ; (B3)
and, so the particles are more likely to be found in regions
where the external potential UðrÞis smaller. In equilibrium,
this is expected intuitively. If UðrÞis a hard wall potential
185 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Meneses Jo ~ao, Santos Pires, and Viana Parente Lopes 185 04 October 2023 23:03:33
(inﬁnite outside the walls, zero inside), then the density of
particles reduces to the familiar expression N/V, where Vis
the volume of the container and coincides with Veff.
a)Electronic mail: simao.joao@fc.up.pt
b)Electronic mail: jlopes@fc.up.pt
1F. Reif, Fundamentals of Thermal and Statistical Physics (Waveland
Press, New York, 1965).
2W. Pauli and C. P. Enz, Pauli Lectures on Physics: Volume 3,
Thermodynamics and the Kinetic Theory of Gases (Dover Publications,
Mineola, NY, 1973).
3M. Kardar, Statistical Physics of Particles (Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 2007).
4M. E. Loverude, C. H. Kautz, and P. R. L. Heron, “Student understandingof the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics: Relating work to the adiabatic com-
pression of an ideal gas,” Am. J. Phys. 70, 137–148 (2002).
5M. E. Loverude, C. H. Kautz, and P. R. L. Heron, “Helping students
develop an understanding of Archimedes’ principle. I. Research on student
understanding,” Am. J. Phys. 71, 1178–1187 (2003).
6P. R. L. Heron, M. E. Loverude, P. S. Shaffer, and L. C. McDermott,
“Helping students develop an understanding of Archimedes’ principle. II.
Development of research-based instructional materials,” Am. J. Phys. 71,
1188–1195 (2003).
7J. Bierman and E. Kincanon, “Reconsidering Archimedes’ principle,”
Phys. Teach. 41, 340–344 (2003).
8C. H. Kautz, P. R. L. Heron, M. E. Loverude, and L. C. McDermott,
“Student understanding of the ideal gas law, Part I: A macroscopic
perspective,” Am. J. Phys. 73, 1055–1063 (2005).
9C. H. Kautz, P. R. L. Heron, P. S. Shaffer, and L. C. McDermott, “Student
understanding of the ideal gas law, Part II: A microscopic perspective,”
Am. J. Phys. 73, 1064–1071 (2005).
10M. E. Loverude, P. R. L. Heron, and C. H. Kautz, “Identifying and
addressing student difﬁculties with hydrostatic pressure,” Am. J. Phys. 78,
75–85 (2010).
11D. G. Andrews, An Introduction to Atmospheric Physics (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2010).12L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Fluid Mechanics (Pergamon Press,
Oxford, UK, 1987).
13J. H. Irving and J. G. Kirkwood, “The statistical mechanical theory of
transport processes. IV. The equations of hydrodynamics,” J. Chem. Phys.
18, 817–829 (1950).
14J. G. Kirkwood, F. P. Buff, and M. S. Green, “The statistical mechanical
theory of transport processes. III. The coefﬁcients of shear and bulk vis-
cosity of liquids,” J. Chem. Phys. 17, 988–994 (1949).
15J. de Boer, “Molecular distribution and equation of state of gases,” Rep.
Prog. Phys. 12, 305–374 (1949).
16M. Kac and J. M. Luttinger, “A formula for the pressure in statistical
mechanics,” J. Math. Phys. 14, 583–585 (1973).
17B. Leroy, “Archimedes principle: A simple derivation,” Eur. J. Phys. 6,
56–56 (1985).
18R. E. Vermillion, “Derivations of Archimedes’ principle,” Am. J. Phys.
59, 761–762 (1991).
19J. A. Van den Akker, “Generalized Archimedes’ principle,” Am. J. Phys.
58, 1106–1108 (1990).
20L. Mistura, “The deﬁnition of the pressure tensor in the statistical
mechanics of nonuniform classical ﬂuids,” Int. J. Thermophys. 8, 397–403
(1987).
21G. L. Wick and P. F. Tooby, “Centrifugal buoyancy forces,” Am. J. Phys.
45, 1074–1076 (1977).
22F. M. S. Lima and F. F. Monteiro, “Bouyant force in a nonuniform gravita-
tional ﬁeld,” Rev. Bras. Ensino Fis. 35, 3701-1–3701-4 (2013).
23Strictly, these are not necessary conditions, but they ensure that the func-
tion has the correct properties in the limiting procedure later on for Upto
exclude the particles from the interior of the probe.
24B. Reed, “Archimedes’ law sets a good energy-minimization example,”
Phys. Educ. 39, 322–323 (2004).
25A. Altintas, “Archimedes’ principle as a application of the divergence the-
orem,” IEEE Trans. Educ. 33, 222 (1990).
26F. M. S. Lima, “Using surface integrals for checking Archimedes’ law of
buoyancy,” Eur. J. Phys. 33, 101–113 (2011).
27Physics League Across Numerous Countries for Kick-ass Students
(PLANCKS), 8th ed., Porto, Portugal (2021).
186 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Meneses Jo ~ao, Santos Pires, and Viana Parente Lopes 186 04 October 2023 23:03:33
