
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2023
A teaching-learning sequence about climate change: From
theory to practicea) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Stefano T offaletti ; Marco Di Mauro ; Massimiliano Malgieri ; Tommaso Rosi ; Eugenio T ufino ; Pasquale Onorato ;
Stefano Oss
Am. J. Phys.  91, 676–684 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0137089
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Intrinsic W avelength Standard Absorption Bands in Holmium Oxide Solution for UV/visible Molecular
Absorption Spectrophotometry
Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data  (March 2005) 04 October 2023 22:56:00
A teaching-learning sequence about climate change: From theory
to practicea)
Stefano Toffalettib)and Marco Di Mauroc)
Physical Science Communication Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Trento, Via Sommarive 14,
38123 Povo (Trento), Italy
Massimiliano Malgierid)
Department of Physics, University of Pavia, via Bassi 6, 27100 Pavia, Italy
Tommaso Rosi,e)Eugenio Tufino,f)Pasquale Onorato,g)and Stefano Ossh)
Physical Science Communication Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Trento, Via Sommarive 14,
38123 Povo (Trento), Italy
(Received 30 November 2022; accepted 14 July 2023)
We describe a collection of relatively simple experiments and laboratory demonstrations devoted
to the physics of Earth’s energy balance. Many of the experiments also address fundamental
aspects of physics at the undergraduate level. Results of classroom testing of this sequence ofactivities are presented and discussed.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of
Physics Teachers. https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0137089
I. INTRODUCTION
Climate change, a phenomenon with no political or geo-
graphical boundaries, is one of the most important issues fac-ing our world. It is part of the role of science to relate issues
concerning global warming to the physics and chemistry of
the atmosphere using formal theoretical and experimental
tools and protocols. At the university level, through carefully
structured laboratory investigations, students can study thephysics of the atmosphere, learn methods of experimental
and theoretical investigation, and understand the ethical
commitment of the scientiﬁc community to address issues ofimportance to humanity and the planet.
1,2
We present here an experiment-based teaching-learning
sequence (TLS), suitable for undergraduate and masters
students, mainly devoted to the physical basis of the green-
house effect (GHE), leading to the development of a sim-
ple but effective model for the Earth’s climate3that is
within reach of students and allows qualitative predictions
of the radiative steady-state average temperature of the
Earth-atmosphere system receiving radiation from the Sun
and understanding of the effects of the increase in green-
house gases in the atmosphere. Feedback effects can beincluded as well. The need for a TLS dedicated to this spe-
ciﬁc topic stems from the fact that the GHE is difﬁcult to
place in traditional physics and science curricula becauseit requires concepts from several traditionally distinct
areas in physics. The TLS includes interesting phenomena
in optics, thermodynamics, and radiative transfer that help
students integrate knowledge and see physics as a unitary
discipline.
The paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we outline
the methodology we adopted in developing and improving
the TLS. Then, in Sec. III, we describe the model we con-
struct in the TLS. In Sec. IV, we provide a short description
of the context of the experiments and the methods for data
collection, and in Sec. V, we discuss the difﬁculties and mis-
conceptions of students, considering both the literature and
the results of our pre-tests. In Sec. VI, we provide a detailed
description of the various experimental activities. In Sec.VII, we describe the results of the assessments we have con-
ducted on the students who completed the sequence. Section
VIII is devoted to our conclusions.II. FRAMEWORK
A. Design principles
Designing a TLS for a complex phenomenon like the
GHE requires integrating concepts from different areas ofphysics. The sequence must also be accessible, appealing,
and useful for students with diverse backgrounds, including
future teachers of many disciplines: physics, mathematics,chemistry, Earth, and life sciences. Finally, a basic goal is to
provide a progressive construction of a model of the GHE
with increasing complexity.
These considerations make it almost essential to build the
teaching-learning sequence around a series of experimental
activities. Constructing concepts through experimental activ-
ities keeps all students engaged, even those who may alreadyhave a reasonable working knowledge of the topic at hand,
through laboratory activities that may still be novel to them
and help consolidate their knowledge. On the other hand, forstudents who are novices, experiments constitute a meaning-
ful context for laying the foundations of a progressive con-
struction of concepts.
B. Design of experiments
In designing the experiments, we were guided by the
AAPT Recommendations for the Undergraduate PhysicsLaboratory Curriculum
4which emphasizes designing experi-
ments; modeling, analyzing, and visualizing data; and com-
municating physics. We tried to implement structured
inquiry-based lab activities5in which the teacher speciﬁes
the problem and the procedure to be followed, but the out-
come of the experiment is not known in advance, and some
decision-making space is left for students during the investi-gation. We frequently (for example, in the activity on ther-
mal equilibrium of different bodies under radiation or the
one on the Beer–Lambert absorbance law) use the Predict-Observe-Explain (POE) strategy as the base of the structured
inquiry approach: The inquiry research question is the one
which is posed to students in the “predict” phase, and subse-quently, the student is guided to perform the experimental
activity, collect data and analyze the results, compare them
to their initial prediction, and possibly develop a new model.
676 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 676 04 October 2023 22:56:00
In some cases, a POE-based inquiry is not applicable or
effective. For example, in the activity on the Stefan-
Boltzmann law (cf. Sec. VI B ), most students would not
know where to start from to formulate a prediction. Hence,they are guided by the instructors to investigate the role of
temperature. The use of demonstration experiments is lim-
ited to cases where it is necessary to show some aspect of aphenomenon, but there is not enough time or instrumentation
to have students safely carrying it out (see Figs. 3and4).
III. FROM THE MODELS TO THE CONCEPTS
The main emphasis of our activities is on building a physi-
cal model to make predictions and compare them with exper-imental measurements. Students also engage in data analysis
and visualization.
The activity proposed to the students is centered on the
step-by-step construction of two different simple models forEarth’s climate, both of which crucially involve the concept
of radiative equilibrium. The ﬁrst, simpler, model only
includes the two main “actors,” namely, the Earth and theSun.
6This model predicts a steady-state temperature which
is/C018/C14C and hence—although the relative error is a mere
10%—far from the expected mean value for the Earth. This
failure prompts the development of a revised model thatincludes the Earth’s atmosphere. This will give a much better
estimate. The many further reﬁnements that can be consid-
ered, which are important in order to obtain a quantitativelyaccurate model, will not concern us since the second model
already allows a satisfactory general insight into the
phenomenon.In this section, we brieﬂy discuss these two models and
the key concepts we have extracted from them. These con-
cepts are gradually learned by students as the sequence is
carried out, achieving in the end the construction of the sec-
ond model.
A. First model—Radiative energy budget
As previously stated, the ﬁrst model only involves the
radiative exchange between the Sun and the Earth and the
energy budget. In this model, the Sun is considered as an
ideal black body which emits electromagnetic radiation in
space. Based on the Earth–Sun distance and the Sun’s tem-
perature, one can compute the solar constant; that is, the
average power that each unit of area of the Earth receives
from the Sun.
From the solar constant and knowing Earth’s albedo, we
can write down the condition for radiative equilibrium
between the solar radiation absorbed by the Earth and thatemitted by the Earth. Also, if the Earth is assumed to emit
radiation with emissivity equal to 1, we can use the
Stefan–Boltzmann law to compute its average temperature.
1. Definition of the relevant concepts
The physical concepts that underlie the model we just
described, which students must master to understand it, are
summarized in Table I. In this table, for each stage of the
TLS, we describe the relevant conceptual area and sub-area
and the list of experiments to be performed. Then, we specify
whether the experiments will be quantitative, involving
detailed measurements and data analysis, or just qualitative,
Table I. First model concepts.
Stage Conceptual area Sub-area Experiments/activity [type] (section) Learning goals
1 Electro-magnetic
(EM) spectrumSpectral bands and
their energiesComparison between continuous and line spectra using
a Home-Made Spectroscope (HMS) [qualitative] (Sec.
VI A )Developing technical and practical
laboratory skills
2 Radiation-matter
interactionReﬂection, refraction,
absorption, scatteringTray experiment (with collimated beam and red-green-
blue (RGB) ﬁlters) [qualitative] (Sec. VI C )Designing experiments, Technical
and practical laboratory skills, Data
analysis Snell’s law Tray experiment with collimated beam and no ﬁlter
[quantitative]
3 Radiation-matter
interactionSelective absorption Tray experiment with RGB ﬁlters [qualitative]
(Sec. VI C )Designing experiments
4 Thermal radiation Stefan–Boltzmann
lawStefan Boltzmann lamp7[Quantitative] Modeling, Data analysis
5 Energy balance Radiative equilibrium,
stationary statesExperiment witd the black and white plates [quantita-
tive] (Sec. VI D )Practical skills, Data analysis
Deﬁnition of the GHE Albedo
Heat Heat propagation;
heat and energy
6 Energy balance Radiative equilibrium,
stationary statesMeasurement of the power of a bulb (and of the solar
constant)8[quantitative]Modeling, Data analysis
7 Energy balance Radiative equilibrium,
stationary statesLeaking bucket with one hole [qualitative] (Sec. VI D ) Collecting data, Data analysis
8 Thermal radiation Wien’s displacement
lawExperiment of the bulb (with HMS) and PhET simula-
tion (Blackbody Spectrum9) [qualitative þsimulation]
(Sec. VI A )Modeling, Data analysis, Technical
and practical skills
9 Thermal radiation Emissivity,
Stefan–Boltzmann
law for gray bodiesLeslie’s cube with thermocouple and FLIR10[qualita-
tive] (Sec. VI B )Modeling
10 Deﬁnition of the GHE Average surface
temperatureConstruction of the ﬁrst model for the climate [theoreti-
cal] (Sec. VI D )Modeling
677 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Toffaletti et al. 677 04 October 2023 22:56:00
or whether the phase will involve theoretical computations
and modeling. Finally, the learning goals are indicated.
B. Second model—Inclusion of the atmosphere
The model described in the preceding subsection is very
useful for introducing simple concepts. However, as men-
tioned earlier, it predicts a very low value for Earth’s average
temperature. Therefore, students are encouraged to consider
the atmosphere, which plays a pivotal role due to the pres-ence of greenhouse gases (GHGs).
A simpliﬁed version of the Manabe model11,12is our basis
in developing the model (Fig. 1), where the interaction of the
atmosphere with radiation coming from the Sun and from
the Earth’s surface is modeled using two coefﬁcients, called
aVand aIR, which, respectively, represent the fractions of
incoming visible and IR radiation that are absorbed by the
atmosphere. The emission properties of the atmosphere, bothtoward Earth and toward outer space, are assumed to be
described by the Stefan–Boltzmann law with emissivity
equal to one. Like the ﬁrst model, this is a highly simpliﬁed
zero-dimensional model in which Earth and its atmosphereare treated as uniform, but it is sufﬁcient to understand the
crucial role played by the atmosphere in the radiative bal-
ance of the Earth and to obtain a reasonable quantitative
result for the equilibrium temperature.
1. Definition of the concepts
The introduction of the atmosphere in the model requires
the understanding of some further concepts with respect tothose already listed in Table I, mainly in connection with the
ideas of selective absorption and selective transparency,
especially in the unfamiliar case of IR radiation. The newconcepts are listed in Table II, which is organized in the
same way as Table I.
IV. CONTEXT OF INSTRUCTION AND METHODS
FOR DATA COLLECTION
The sequence presented in this paper was tested with 85
students in the ﬁrst or the second year of their master’s
degrees in mathematics or physics at the University of
Trento between 2017 and 2022. The mathematics studentshad all taken general (classical) physics classes, as is com-pulsory in Italy. Some of them had also taken an introductory
course in modern physics (i.e., basics of quantum theory and
special relativity).
Data on student understanding were collected by means of
pre- and post-tests, with questions covering the main concep-
tual areas described earlier (for more details, see supplemen-
tary material online
13) Items were either taken or adapted
from some works in the literature3or are of our own design,
and over the years, some of them have undergone minor
revisions while preserving the general meaning and objec-tives of the original ones. A very important source of infor-
mation is an item requiring students to describe and
represent in a drawing, the physical mechanisms involved inthe GHE.
Fig. 1. A model for the radiative balance of the Earth that includes the atmo-
sphere which absorbs a fraction of visible radiation from the Sun ( E) and a
fraction of infrared radiation from the Earth (X). The model also includes
the radiation emitted by the atmosphere (Y).
Table II. Additional concepts needed for the second model.
Stage Conceptual area Sub-area Experiments/activity [type] (section) Learning goals
11 EM spectrum Distinguishing between visi-
ble and IR radiationFLIR vision [qualitative] (Secs. VI A–VI C ) Modeling, technical and
practical laboratory skills
12 Radiation-matter
interactionAbsorption (Beer’s law) Experiment on the thickness of the absorber (sheets of
paper) [quantitative] (Sec. VI C )Collecting data, model-
ing, data analysis
Absorption (Beer’s law) Experiment on the concentration of the absorber (tray
with dye) [Quantitative] (Sec. VI C )
Selective absorption (mean
free path as a function of the
wavelength)Experiment on the absorption of incident light with dif-
ferent wavelength (tray with dye and source with RGB
ﬁlters) [quantitative] (Sec. VI C )
Selective absorption PhET simulation on Beer’s law9for different substances
[simulation]
13 Radiation-matter
interactionSelective transparency in the
IRSelective transparency with FLIR (of glass, plastic, and
silicon wafers) [qualitative] (Sec. VI C )Collecting data, model-
ing, data analysis
14 Radiation-matter
interactionMicroscopic aspects of selec-
tive transparencyPhET simulation on the interaction of various GHGs
molecules with photons of different wavelengths9
[simulation]Modeling
15 Energy balance Radiative equilibrium, sta-
tionary statesLeaking bucket with two holes [qualitative] (Sec. VI D ) Modeling
16 Deﬁnition of the GHE Average surface temperature;
albedo; selective absorption
of GHGsConstruction of the second model for the climate [theo-
retical] (Sec. VI E)Modeling
678 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Toffaletti et al. 678 04 October 2023 22:56:00
V. STUDENT DIFFICULTIES WITH CONCEPTS
RELATED TO THE GHE
Some of the difﬁculties that students experience come
from the lack of adequate knowledge of the electromagneticspectrum, in particular concerning radiation that cannot be
detected by the human eye such as IR radiation. Before being
exposed to the relevant part of the TLS, students exhibited awidespread difﬁculty in associating each band to a positionin the electromagnetic spectrum, and about 20% of the stu-
dents had difﬁculty in identifying the bands themselves.
It is well known that students generally do not consider
the phenomenon of IR radiation as a mechanism for energytransfer. During studies on climate change, Jarrett
14and
Jarrett et al.15pointed out that students often lack an ade-
quate understanding of blackbody radiation, and still more
often they neglect the fact that all bodies emit thermal radia-tion characterized by their temperature.3According to our
preliminary tests, many students (about 39%) even at
advanced undergraduate levels do not consider the transfer
of energy from a hot body through the vacuum to bepossible.
Before the experiments, students are asked to predict what
should happen to a light beam going through a tray ﬁlled
with liquid. What emerged in our case was that, while the
majority of students consider the phenomena of reﬂection(52%) and refraction (82%), they tend to neglect lightabsorption (mentioned by 5%) and scattering (mentioned by
4%). No student listed all four phenomena.
A second open-ended question concerned transparency
(i.e., “explain what it means for a body to be transparent”).Only 13% of students mention that this is a wavelength-dependent property. More than half of the students (58%)
understand transparency as an absolute phenomenon, stating
explicitly that if a body is transparent, it has this propertywith respect to any kind of electromagnetic radiation.
When we asked students to predict what happens to
objects that are identical except for their colors (white or
black) are exposed to solar radiation, more than 80% of them
correctly concluded that the equilibrium temperature ishigher for the black object. Most students correctly selectedthe reason that they absorb and reﬂect radiation differently.
Despite this, the idea of balance between absorbed and emit-
ted energy is very often not behind the students’ answers, asthey mention the different capability to absorb radiation butnot equilibrium between rates of absorbing and losing
energy. Combining these results with those of the question
on energy transfer through the vacuum, it appears that manystudents have a mental model for which luminous objects
such as the Sun can emit radiant energy, but ordinary objects
cannot, and can only absorb radiation from a luminous objectwith higher or lower efﬁciency. This problem becomes evi-dent when students are questioned about the energy balance
of the Earth and is seen in the majority of the GHE diagrams
made by students before they began the TLS. The drawingsproduced before the TLS clearly show the pre-instructionalideas that are identiﬁed in the literature as underlying the
most common explanations of the GHE:
16
•Trapping due to single or multiple reﬂections, both at the
Earth and at the upper “surface” of the atmosphere;
•presence of a delimited layer of greenhouse gas (or some-times dust) acting as a physical barrier;
•inadequate analogy with an actual farming greenhouse.Only 11% of the students link the energy of the radiation to
the color (drawing solar radiation as yellow and Earth’s radia-
tion as red) or to the wavelength (drawing short waves for the
Sun’s radiation and long waves for the Earth’s radiation).
VI. THE EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we describe in detail all the experimental
activities listed in Tables IandII, which form the core of the
TLS. For each conceptual area, we include the experimental
setup, the results of measurements, and the data analysis.
A. Electromagnetic spectrum and infrared radiation
The initial experimental activities aim at visualizing the
different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum and at com-paring different sources of radiation to enable students to
realize that all objects emit thermal radiation. These activi-
ties are followed by a short lecture in which the main fea-
tures of the electromagnetic spectrum and of all its
components are summarized. For these experiments, students
use simple spectrometers17,18based on diffraction gratings
(which they build on their own, after the necessary materials
and a minimum of explanations are provided) to study visi-
ble light, and they use the FLIR One Thermal Imaging
Camera19to study IR light. Both can be attached to smart
phones to display and record the images.
1. Measurement results and data analysis
In the ﬁrst experiment, students make qualitative observa-
tions of different light sources that all appear white (incan-
descent bulb, ﬂuorescent lamp, and LED lamp), using both
the spectrometer17,18and the IR camera.19Quantitative data
analysis is not expected. Students are then asked to explain
what they have observed. This activity helps students under-
stand that there are different physical mechanisms that gov-
ern the production of light and develops their skills in
constructing and using the instruments.
B. The Stefan–Boltzmann law and emission from hot
bodies
After showing that different bodies emit electromagnetic
radiation in different ways and pointing out that thermal radia-
tion is not always visible, we focus on the Stefan–Boltzmann
law. In Fig. 2, we show spectra of an incandescent light bulb at
different voltages, taken with the smartphone cameraspectroscope.
Fig. 2. A sequence of spectra for different temperatures produced by the
light bulb and captured by the HMS. The camera is set to manual mode in
order for its sensitivity to be constant. The voltage applied to the lamp is
increased from 3 to 12 V.
679 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Toffaletti et al. 679 04 October 2023 22:56:00
From Fig. 2, one can observe that as the voltage applied to
the light bulb increases, the bulb gradually becomes brighter,
while the color of the ﬁlament changes from red to white.
(The change in color is not evident in the photo due tounavoidable overexposure, but it is clearly visible to thenaked eye.) A qualitative observation with the diffraction-grating-based spectrometer shows how the increase in temper-ature corresponds not only to an increase in the intensity ofthe radiation emitted across the whole spectrum but also to ashift of the intensity toward shorter wavelength bands (greenand blue), which are almost absent at lower temperatures.
The next experiment is instrumental for countering the idea
that only visibly luminous bodies can emit radiation. Thesource is a graphite pencil lead attached to a voltage generator(which can also be replaced by a series of batteries). The cur-rent is increased until the graphite glows. Due to the intrinsicrisk associated with an exposed incandescent body, we offeredthis activity as a demonstration, rather than as a student experi-ment, and we suggest that educators undertaking this TLS dothe same. From Fig. 3, where pictures of the graphite lead in
the visible light and in the IR are compared, it is evident that atlower temperatures, only IR radiation is emitted, while at sufﬁ-ciently high temperatures, visible light also appears. (At ﬁrst,this light is reddish, and then it tends to white.)
The next experiment involves the Leslie cube (Fig. 4),
which is a metal cube with faces that are bare (shiny) or
painted white or black. It is studied using a thermocouple, anIR thermometer, and an IR camera. Students can observehow, while the thermocouple measures the same temperatureon all faces (which, of course, are in thermal contact witheach other, hence at the same equilibrium temperature), the
IR thermometer and the IR camera measure a lower apparenttemperature for the shiny face compared to the painted faces.Hence, they can understand how the behavior of the whiteand black faces is closer to that of an ideal black body, withrespect to the shiny face, for which quite a small emissivitycoefﬁcient emust be introduced.
This experiment contains several interesting insights
related to the behavior of radiating black and nonblack bod-ies. In particular, it allows students to appreciate the impor-tance of emissivity, for which a shiny body is usually verysmall, while it is much larger for opaque materials (regard-less of their color). This leads to a distorted measurement ofthe glossy face temperature when using the thermal imagingcamera. Therefore, calibration of the instrument is necessary:The camera’s internal software uses the Stefan-Boltzmannlaw to calculate the temperature based on the measured radi-ation intensity and the given emissivity. There is an exten-sive literature on the operation of IR cameras, including inan educational framework, see, in particular, Ref. 19.
C. Radiation–matter interaction
A study of the behavior of different materials under differ-
ent kinds of incident radiation is used as an introduction toselective transparency, essential for discussing the role of theEarth’s atmosphere.
1. Demonstrations
The ﬁrst demonstration involves light beams passing
through a transparent plastic tray ﬁlled with water.
(a) Using white light, students observe the four relevant
phenomena of light–matter interaction: Reﬂection,refraction, absorption, and scattering.
(b) Using a light source capable of generating beams of
different colors (blue, green, and red) and coloring thewater with different food dyes (Fig. 5), students
observe how the attenuation of radiation depends onthe wavelength and on the color of the solution.
(c) The use of the IR camera shows the different behavior
of materials when visible light or IR radiation passesthrough them (Fig. 6).
2. Experimental setup
Three experiments are included in this section. Unlike the
previous experiments, these involve quantitative data analysis.
(a) The ﬁrst one employs a light source whose brightness
does not saturate the sensor (desk lamp with a 40 Wbulb), a smartphone, and some paper sheets. We used
Fig. 3. Pictures of a current-carrying graphite lead, taken by the students using a FLIR ONE camera, both in the visible region (left sides of each frame ) and
the IR region (right sides of each frame). At low temperatures, no thermal radiation is observed (left frame), while for higher currents, the graphite lead
becomes warmer and a stronger IR emitter (center frame) up to getting incandescent, emitting a red light (right frame).
Fig. 4. The FLIR image of the Leslie cube shows emission of thermal radia-tion from different surfaces. Different surfaces of identical temperature can
be seen to have very different emission properties. The left surface (which
appears as yellow/red, indicative of high IR emission) is painted with blackpaint, while the right one (which appears blue, indicative of low IR emis-
sion) is made of polished aluminum. The camera software assumes that a
higher IR emission corresponds to a higher temperature, and therefore, asnoted earlier, it reports a higher temperature for the black surface.
680 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Toffaletti et al. 680 04 October 2023 22:56:00
the Physics Toolbox suite21to record data from the
smartphone’s ambient light sensor; Phyphox is another
alternative.22
(b) The second experiment employs an IR source (the
black face of a Leslie cube can be conveniently used
for this purpose), a smartphone equipped with a FLIR
camera, and some plastic sheets. Figure 7shows the IR
images obtained by adding the plastic sheets one by
one between the source and the FLIR camera.
(c) The third experiment employs an LED ﬂashlight as a
light source, three inexpensive colored gel ﬁlters, asmartphone, and a plastic tray ﬁlled with water where
food dye is added drop by drop. Using the luxmeter of
the cellphone, the light intensity is measured ﬁrst with-out ﬁlters and then putting the three colored ﬁlters one
by one between the ﬂashlight and the glass. Then, a
drop of food dye is added, the solution is mixed, andthe procedure is repeated step by step. The procedure is
iterated ten times.
3. Experimental results and data analysis
Typical results obtained by students are given in Fig. 8.I n
panel (a), we show the measurements by a group of studentsof the light transmitted by paper sheets. The ﬁgure shows a
very clear exponential behavior. These data were obtained
after the subtraction of the offset, corresponding to the
background light, and are normalized with respect to the
maximum intensity. The data were analyzed by students
using spreadsheet software or the freeware app SciDAVis
(which is particularly suitable since it automatically takes
the offset into account in the ﬁt, allowing it to be sub-
tracted). In panel (b), we show the measurements of the
transmitted IR radiation by plastic sheets. The ﬁgure shows
that the exponential law gives a very good agreement also
in this case. Panel (c) shows the light transmitted by the red
colored water as a function of the concentration (number of
droplets of food dye), while panel (d) shows the light trans-
mitted by the blue colored water. Figure 8shows again that
the exponential law is in very good agreement with the data
(the plots were obtained without subtracting the offset), and
for each color of the ﬁlter, the value of the absorption coef-
ﬁcient was obtained. Results clearly show that the
Fig. 5. The red, green, and blue ﬁlters of the Basic Optic Light Source from
PASCO (Ref. 20) provide three rays of light. The color-dependent transmit-
tance of the three beams is shown for water containing red (top), green (mid-
dle), and blue (bottom) food dye.
Fig. 6. A hand seen through a silicon plate with a normal camera and with
an infrared camera. The image of a person, partially behind a glass, seen
with a normal camera and with an IR camera.
Fig. 7. Images acquired by the FLIR during the experiment; the number ofplastic sheets grows from upper left (zero sheets) to lower right (11 sheets).
681 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Toffaletti et al. 681 04 October 2023 22:56:00
transmittance of the material strongly depends on the wave-
length of the incident light.
D. Radiative equilibrium
The last step involves investigating the concepts of energy
balance and radiative equilibrium for objects that areexposed to radiation. Stationary states are characterized asstates of dynamical equilibrium, in which the incomingenergy ﬂux is equal to the outgoing energy ﬂux.
The idea of radiative equilibrium is ﬁrst introduced by
means of the leaking bucket analogy: water is poured into a
container that has a hole in it. After an initial transient, thewater level reaches a steady-state value at which the incom-ing ﬂux is equal to the outgoing ﬂux. By comparing differentcontainers, students observe that the steady-state leveldepends on both the rate at which water is added to the con-tainer and the height or size of the hole. The analogy is thendrawn to the dependence of an object’s equilibrium tempera-ture on the mechanism for how heat enters and leaves theobject. This analogy leads into the next experiment.
1. Experimental setup
The experimental apparatus consists of an incandescent
90 W light bulb positioned on a support about 30 cm fromtwo aluminum plates (one painted black and the other white),on a polystyrene base that provides thermal isolation from
the table (Fig. 9). To perform the measurements, a thermom-
eter is put in contact with the lower side of the plate, and thetemperature is recorded at 15 s intervals with the lamp turnedon, until the temperature becomes stable. Then, the light isturned down, and the measurements continue as the platescool. If weather conditions are suitable, this experiment can
be repeated outside, with the Sun in place of the bulb.
2. Experimental results and data analysis
In Fig. 10, we report the data that were obtained and ana-
lyzed by the students. The experiment helps students to bet-
ter understand the concept of thermal equilibrium in a
Fig. 8. Student data and analysis: (a) normalized transmitted light intensity as a function of the number of sheets. The line shows a ﬁt to an exponentia l decay.
(b) Normalized transmitted IR radiation as a function of the number of plastic sheets. The FLIR camera actually measures IR radiation intensity, and t empera-
ture is calculated from this measurement based on the body emissivity. Students can acquire temperature values by opening the so-called “thermal GIF ” images
generated by FLIR cameras and containing, in a proprietary, open format (which depends on the speciﬁc thermal camera used, in the present case, for exa mple,
see Ref. 10) radiation intensity data (converted to temperature values through emissivity calibration and the blackbody Planck curve). (c Normalized transmi t-
ted light intensity as a function of the number of droplets of red dye for each of the three light ﬁlters. (d) Blue food dye for the three light ﬁlters.
Fig. 9. The experimental apparatus. The thermometers are in contact with
the black and white plates; the system is thermally isolated by a polystyrene
base.
682 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Toffaletti et al. 682 04 October 2023 22:56:00
situation involving heat exchanges and the role played by the
different albedos due to the colors. Pictures taken with theFLIR during the heating process show how the plate emits
more and more IR radiation until constant temperature is
reached.
E. End of the sequence: Construction of models of the
GHE
Once the basic physical tools which are essential to
describe the energy balance of the Earth-atmosphere system
have been carefully studied, as described in the previous sec-tion, students are exposed to the models described in Sec.
III. Starting from the plate experiment, students are guided
to build the ﬁrst model and to compute the equilibrium tem-perature of an Earth without an atmosphere. Then, the
observed phenomenon of selective transparency provides the
basis for the introduction of the atmosphere in the model andfor the redeﬁnition of radiative balances, exploiting the anal-ogy with liquids and gases, namely, selective absorption and
dependence on the concentration.
23In this step, students are
guided to construct the model themselves working in groups.The teacher then collected and discussed the new hypotheses
advanced by students, and where appropriate, the teacher
summarizes and incorporates them in the presentation of thenew model.
In this way, one can construct a schematic representation
of the energy ﬂuxes between Earth, the Sun, the atmosphere,
and outer space in equilibrium
24,25that is characterized by
the measurements performed by climatologists.
VII. RESULTS
We now discuss the educational results of our TLS,
roughly following the order of presentation of topics andconceptual areas.
Concerning the electromagnetic spectrum, we observed
that, after the teaching action, the percentage of students able
to order the relevant spectral bands by increasing frequencygrew from 44% to 85%. The remaining 15% is split between
those who inverted the order (10% as before) and those who
omitted parts of the spectrum (5%, compared to 37% in thepre-test). Thus, the answers indicate a signiﬁcant improve-
ment in the students’ ability to associate to each spectral
band its position in the electromagnetic spectrum.Concerning radiative energy transfers, we noticed that the
percentage of students who did not consider radiation emis-sion as a mechanism for energy transmission from a hot(non-luminous) body to the vacuum decreased from 39% to7%. Students showed improvement in considering the differ-ent types of interaction that light can have with matter, witha dramatic increase (from 5% to 90%) of students mention-ing absorption and a signiﬁcant increase in those mentioningreﬂection and scattering (from 52% to 97% and from 4% to68%, respectively). In the post-test, 61% of students mentionall four phenomena.
Concerning the concept of transparency, the percentage of
students who mentioned selectivity increased from 13% to85%, while the percentage of students viewing it explicitlyas an absolute phenomenon decreased from 58% to 15%.
Before the sequence, few students used the idea of radia-
tive balance to explain the GHE. Instead, at the end of the
TLS, 70% of them recognized this concept in the case of aradiative object (plates placed under a light bulb), and 90%of them recognized it as a mechanism for the Earth’s GHE towork; moreover, 81% were able to schematize the system ina similar way as proposed in Fig. 1.
At the end of the TLS, in the post-test, students were asked
to brieﬂy describe the greenhouse effect with their ownwords.
Most of them correctly identiﬁed the role played by the
atmosphere in absorbing and re-emitting IR radiation, whichincreases the temperature of the Earth-atmosphere system.Students appeared conﬁdent in qualitative explanations, andmany of them also included quantitative models and formu-las, especially the Stefan-Boltzmann law, and about onequarter of them referred to some of the experiments per-formed. A positive result is that, at the end of the TLS, thepre-instructional ideas related to trapping and to the analogywith an actual greenhouse were completely discarded.However, we observed that some problems related to theidea of the presence of a thin layer of greenhouse gases inthe atmosphere persisted. Subsequent discussion revealedthat this idea was in most cases used for illustration and wasnot, in fact, related to a lack of understanding.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
This paper describes an experiment-based TLS designed
to make undergraduate students familiar with a simple modelfor the Earth’s climate, which contains the main physicalactors and principles of the GHE, in such a way that studentsare guided to become thoroughly familiar with its working.A second aim of the sequence is to make students conﬁdentwith laboratory experimentation, by means of quantitativeand qualitative experiments and through data analysis. Theresults we collected up until now show a signiﬁcant improve-ment in the students’ understanding of the main conceptualissues involved and of the overall working of the GHE.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
a)Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the
environment, sustainability, and climate change.
b)Electronic mail: s.toffaletti@unitn.it, ORCID: 0000-0002-6491-4712.
c)Electronic mail: marco.dimauro@unitn.it, ORCID: 0000-0002-1532-8274.
Fig. 10. Data obtained by the PASCO temperature sensors (Ref. 20) and
plotted using Capstone (dark gray—black plate; light gray—white plate).
683 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Toffaletti et al. 683 04 October 2023 22:56:00
d)Electronic mail: massimiliano.malgieri@unipv.it, ORCID: 0000-0002-
9254-2354.
e)Electronic mail: tommaso.rosi@unitn.it, ORCID: 0000-0002-7381-6241.
f)Electronic mail: eugenio.tuﬁno@unitn.it, ORCID: 0000-0002-6784-3761.
g)Electronic mail: pasquale.onorato@unitn.it, ORCID: 0000-0002-2110-
7582.
h)Electronic mail: stefano.oss@unitn.it, ORCID: 0000-0001-9427-2151.
1D. P. Shepardson, D. Niyogi, S. Choi, and U. Charusombat, Clim. Change
104, 481–507 (2011).
2V. Koulaidis and V. Christidou, “Models of students’ thinking concerning
the greenhouse effect and teaching implications,” Sci. Educ. 83(5),
559–576 (1999).
3U. Besson, A. De Ambrosis, and P. Mascheretti, “Studying the physical basisof global warming: Thermal effects of the interaction between radiation and
matter and greenhouse effect,” Eur. J. Phys. 31(2), 375–388 (2010).
4AAPT Recommendations for the Undergraduate Physics Laboratory
Curriculum, <https://www.aapt.org/resources/upload/labguidlinesdocument_
ebendorsed_nov10.pdf >, accessed on December 10, 2022.
5E. Tafoya, D. W. Sunal, and P. Knecht, School Sci. Math. 80(1), 43–48 (1980).
6J. Houghton, Global Warming , 5th ed. (Cambridge U. P., 2015), pp. 14–27.
7P. Onorato, T. Rosi, E. Tuﬁno, C. Caprara, and M. Malgieri, “Quantitative
experiments in a distance lab: Studying blackbody radiation with a
smartphone,” Eur. J. Phys. 42(4), 045103 (2021).
8W. Lee, H. L. Gilley, and J. B. Caris, Am. J. Phys. 65, 1105–1109 (1997).
9University of Colorado Boulder, see <https://phet.colorado.edu/ >for
“PhET: Free Online physics, Chemistry, Biology, Earth Science and Math
Simulations,” accessed on December 10, 2022.
10FLIR ONE Pro Thermal Imaging Camera for Smarthphones, <https://
www.ﬂir.com/products/ﬂir-one-pro/ >, accessed on December 12, 2022.
11J. M. Wallace and P. V. Hobbs, Atmospheric Science: An Introductory
Survey: Second Edition (Elsevier, 2006), pp. 117–123.
12S. Manabe and R. T. Wetherald, “Thermal equilibrium of the atmosphere
with a given distribution of relative humidity,” J. Atmos. Sci. 24(3),
241–259 (1967).13See supplementary material online containing all the pre- and post-tests
that were administered to the students during the TLS.
14L. E. Jarret, “Investigating secondary school students’ understanding ofclimate change,” Ph.D. thesis (University of Wollongong, New SouthWales, Australia, 2013), see https://ro.uow.edu.au/theses/3869/ (retrieved
24/07/2023).
15L. Jarrett, B. Ferry, and G. Takacs, Int. J. Innovation Sci. Math. Educ.20(2), 25–41 (2012).
16D. P. Shepardson, D. Niyogi, S. Choi, and U. Charusombat, Environ.
Educ. Res. 15(5), 549–570 (2009).
17P. Onorato, M. Malgieri, and A. De Ambrosis, “Measuring the hydrogen
Balmer series and Rydberg’s constant with a homemade spectrophotometer,”
Eur. J. Phys. 36(5), 058001 (2015).
18P. Onorato, M. Malgieri, and A. De Ambrosis, “Quantitative analysis of
transmittance and photoluminescence using a low cost apparatus,” Eur. J.
Phys. 37(1), 015301 (2016).
19M. Vollmer and K.-P. M €ollmann, Infrared Thermal Imaging:
Fundamentals, Research and Applications (Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &
Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany, 2017).
20PASCO scientiﬁc jScience Lab Equipment and teacher Resources,
<https://www.pasco.com/ >, accessed on December 12, 2022.
21R. Vieyra, C. Vieyra, P. Jeanjacquot, A. Marti, and M. Monteiro, “Turn
Your Smartphone Into a Science Laboratory,” Sci. Teach. 82(9), 32–40
(2015).
22S. Staacks, S. H €utz, H. Heinke, and C. Stampfer, “Advanced tools for
smartphone-based experiments: Phyphox,” Phys. Educ. 53(4), 045009 (2018).
23V. Maron, J.-L. Dufresne, L. P. Pelissier, A. Rabier, and M. Cochepin, see
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.17398 for “Understanding the Origin of Global
Warming—How to Construct the Link between CO 2Emissions and the
Average Temperature of the Earth? (2023),” accessed on June 30, 2023.
24J. T. Kiehl and K. E. Trenberth, Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 78, 197–208
(1997).
25K. E. Trenberth, J. T. Fasullo, and J. Kiehl, Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 90,
311–323 (2009).
684 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Toffaletti et al. 684 04 October 2023 22:56:00
