
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkOCTOBER 01 2022
A z-axis tunneling microscope for undergraduate labs 
Randy Lindgren ; Wesley Kozan ; Noah Fuerst  
 ; Douglas Knapp  
 ; Joshua P . Veazey
Am. J. Phys.  90, 795–800 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0094028
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Zero trust model: A compelling strategy to strengthen the security posture of IT organizations
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2022)
Investigation of thermoelectric properties of chalcogenide semiconductors from first principles
J. Appl. Phys.  (June 201 1)
Impedance measurements in the ear canal
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005) 04 October 2023 23:19:10
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
A z-axis tunneling microscope for undergraduate labs
Randy Lindgren, Wesley Kozan, Noah Fuerst,a)Douglas Knapp,b)and Joshua P . Veazeyc)
Department of Physics, Grand Valley State University, Allendale, Michigan 49401
(Received 31 March 2022; accepted 8 July 2022)
We present the design and construction of a laboratory apparatus that provides advanced
undergraduates with hands-on observations of electron quantum tunneling and the electronic densityof states of various materials. The instrument is inspired by the scanning tunneling microscope
(STM), but its implementation is simpliﬁed by limiting the tip motion to the single dimension along
the tip-sample separation ( z-axis); we refer to the device as the z-axis tunneling microscope (ZTM).
Students are able to use the ZTM to measure electron tunneling probability as a function of barrier
width, estimate relative material work functions, and observe differences in local electronic
structure among metals, semimetals, and semiconductors. We share results obtained by third-yearundergraduate physics students using the instrument for their ﬁnal projects in an advanced
instructional lab course.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0094028
I. INTRODUCTION
First- and second-year undergraduate students often arrive
with enthusiasm for learning about the surprising effects of
quantum mechanics, including quantum tunneling. In course-
work, however, their initial interest may get bogged down by
abstract representations of the tunnel barrier. Studies of
material properties like electronic structure can also chal-
lenge students, because they are abstract and without many
experimental opportunities. Pictorial representations of
tunneling experiments, such as the scanning tunneling micro-
scope (STM), can relieve some abstraction. Many published
examples of homebuilt and student-built STMs have been
valuable for expanding access.1–4However, developing a
corresponding hands-on STM lab adds complexity, and anal-
ysis of images may distract from the core learning objectives
identiﬁed above.
We propose the following simpler solution for undergrad-
uate instructional labs: a tunneling microscope that only
moves the tip along the single axis deﬁned by the tip-sample
separation, an instrument we dub the z-axis tunneling micro-
scope (ZTM). A schematic and photo of the key components
of the ZTM are shown in Fig. 1. Unlike the STM, the ZTM’s
tip does not scan laterally; like the STM, the ZTM operates
in ambient conditions at room temperature. As indicated in
Fig.1by the voltages Vpiezoand preamp output, we designed
the instrument with the presumption that it would interface
with electronics and data acquisition equipment already
existing in undergraduate programs.Two main goals for the experiments facilitated by the
ZTM are the observation of the tunneling current’s exponen-
tial dependence on the tip-sample separation gap ( I-z) and
the observation of differences in the electronic structure
between various materials via tunneling spectroscopy. As we
will show in Secs. IV, the instrument accomplishes these
goals, and it can distinguish differences in electronic density
of states for different classes of conducting solids, e.g., met-als, semimetals, and semiconductors. Additionally, we have
used the instrument in a point contact spectroscopy mode.5
At our four-year, primarily undergraduate institution, third-year physics majors in an advanced instructional lab course
have worked with the fully assembled apparatus (pictured inFig.2), and some of their data are presented here. Given its
simplicity, the ZTM can be used in instructional labs at other
levels, beginning with the sophomore modern physicscourse.
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Vacuum quantum tunneling into a metallic tip was ﬁrst
reported by Binnig et al. in 1982.
6With the tip’s lateral posi-
tion ﬁxed, the current was recorded as a function of the tip’s
vertical distance from the sample ( I-z). This (vacuum- or air-
ﬁlled) sample-tip gap, which is present in both a STM and
ZTM, serves as the tunneling barrier for an electron and is
most simply modeled as a one-dimensional trapezoidal bar-
rier of average height U[Fig. 3(a)]. Undergraduates theoreti-
cally analyze this model during either their sophomore-level
795 Am. J. Phys. 90(10), October 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 795 04 October 2023 23:19:10
(modern physics) or upper-level quantum mechanics lecture
courses and ﬁnd that the solution to the time-independentSchr€odinger equation predicts a tunneling probability that is
exponential with barrier width Dz
jwxðÞj2/e/C02ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
2mU/C0EðÞ =/C22hp
Dz/C25e/C0Aﬃﬃﬃ
Up
Dz;
where mis the mass of an electron, Uis the work function of
the material, and A¼2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2m=/C22hp
/C251:025 eV/C01=2˚A/C01. In this
approximation, we take the energy Eof the electron to be
much less than the barrier height U. Thus, ðU/C0EÞ/C25U.
When plotted on semilog axes, the slope of the I-zgraph is
then/C01:025 eV/C01=2˚A/C01ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Up
. The accuracy of the work func-
tion is higher when both tip and sample are dry, as in ultra-
high vacuum. However, a STM generally does not require
vacuum conditions for achieving atomic resolution for somematerials in air, including the atomic structure of highly ori-ented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG)
7and the room-temperature
charge-density wave (CDW) material, CeTe 3.8
Likewise, measurement of the local electronic density of
states as a function of the bias voltage is also accessible inambient conditions. When using the square tunneling barrierapproximation as we have done above, the Bardeen modelfor tunneling
9predicts the tunneling current to be
I¼4pe
/C22hðeV
0qtipðE/C0eVÞqsampleðEÞTðE;V;dÞdE;where qtipandqsample are the electronic densities of states of
the tip and sample, respectively, and TðE;V;dÞis the trans-
mission probability at energy E, bias V, and barrier width d.10
Assuming constant metallic tip density of states and small
bias voltages, the derivative of the current with respect to volt-age may be approximated as
dI
dV/qsampleðeVÞ:
Thus, the differential conductance d I/dVof the tunnel
junction between the tip and sample is proportional to thelocal electronic density of states, and many electronic fea-tures can be inferred from an I-Vcurve alone.
11Tunneling
I-Vcurves also have high enough thermal resolution at
room temperature to measure other electronic features liket h ec h a r g ed e n s i t yw a v e( C D W )g a pi nC e T e
3.8The
approximation also assumes zero temperature. However,the thermal resolution at room temperature (3 :5k
BT
/C2490 meV) is sufﬁcient to distinguish the electronic density
of states belonging to semiconductors from those of metalsand semimetals.
Fig. 1. (a) Photograph of the ZTM’s tip-sample conﬁguration. The sample is
mounted on a stainless steel disk, held in place by a nickel-coated magnet. A
piezo stack controls the tip-sample separation and is electrically isolated by
a thin piece of alumina. (b) Photograph of the preamp circuit on custom
printed circuit board. (c) Circuit diagram of the preamp with schematic oftip-sample conﬁguration. The circuit is a current ampliﬁer with 107-M X
feedback resistor for a gain of /C2410
8V=A. A pair of large and small decou-
pling capacitors is connected in parallel with the power supply lines to pre-
vent feedback oscillations. To produce a net tunneling current between the
tip and sample, a bias is applied to the sample relative to the tip.
Fig. 2. (a) Schematic of the body of our instrument. Two coarse and one ﬁneadjust micrometer screws bring the tip within 1 mm of the sample before
engaging the piezo approach algorithm. The tip and sample are mounted
near the coarse approach screws to give a mechanical advantage to the ﬁne
adjust. (b) Photograph of the body of our instrument. The pre-amp is
mounted close to the tip. A stepper motor is mounted on a sliding bracketthat was custom-ﬁt and 3D-printed. The stepper motor controls the ﬁne
approach knob. The vibration pad isolates building vibrations.
796 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Lindgren et al. 796 04 October 2023 23:19:10
III. INSTRUMENT DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
Tunneling currents are small (pA-nA). The current-
voltage preamp circuit [Fig. 1(c)] we built has a low-noise
op-amp (OPA124U) and is modeled after Dan Berard’s STMpreamp circuit.
4With the 107-M Xfeedback resistor, our cir-
cuit has a gain of /C24108V=A. Decoupling capacitors are
attached in parallel to the op-amp power supply lines to min-imize feedback oscillations. The circuit is integrated into acustom printed circuit board (see the supplementary materialfor the custom Eagle.brd ﬁle)
12and mounted on the alumi-
num body near the tip (Table I).
The body of the ZTM is constructed from two aluminum
slabs (1 /C23/C26 in)—one with the tip attached and the other
with the sample attached. Figure 2shows a photograph and
schematic of the ZTM body. Two coarse-approach microme-ter screws (1/4–80), which are mounted right next to the tipand sample, bring the tip to within 1 mm of the surface. To
reduce the tip-sample approach rate, the ﬁne adjustment
micrometer screw (1/4–80) is mounted at the far end of thealuminum body, giving a mechanical advantage of approxi-mately 60:1. The advancement of the micrometer screwcombined with the levered mechanical advantage means the
tip approaches the surface at a rate of approximately 5 lm/
revolution of the ﬁne screw. A stepper motor (NEMA-17) is
attached to the ﬁne-adjustment screw in order to automate
the approach. To attach the stepper motor, we drilled a hole
in the top of the micrometer knob to ﬁt the motor shaft. We
then added a set screw through the side of the knob to hold
the shaft ﬁrmly in place. An optional control board
(SparkFun ROB 12779) interfaced the motor with our DAQ
card.
The following standard tip-approach algorithm is used:
after each step, a piezo actuator attached to the tip isextended to search for the surface. If the surface is not found,
the piezo fully retracts the tip, and the stepper motor advan-
ces the ﬁne micrometer knob another step. The process
repeats until the software detects a current greater than the
user-deﬁned set point. The piezo then retracts the tip for
safety and hands control over to the user. Because there is no
topographic imaging (only I-zandI-Vcurves), the feedback
loop required for imaging in STM is not necessary here (the
feedback is typically shut off when using STM for I-zorI-V).
However, monitoring the current by the user while the tip is in
range could help prevent a tip crash from thermal drift (expan-
sion and contraction of the piezo). Optional incorporation of a
feedback loop may help prevent this from happening, but it
should be turned off for I-zandI-Vacquisition. These issues
are discussed further in Sec. V.
The NEMA-17 stepper motor has 200 steps per revolution
but can be operated in one-eighth steps, resulting in an
approach as small as 3 nm per eighth-step. To avoid a tip
crash, the full range of the piezo extension needs only to belarger than the approach per step of the stepper motor.
Fig. 3. Current versus tip height (relative to starting height). (a) Representative
I-zcurve for HOPG showing exponential dependence of the tunneling current
on the tip-sample separation. Inset: 1D model for tunneling through a potential
barrier. (b) Representative I-zcurves for two different materials: Au and
HOPG. The data are linear when plotted on semi-log axes.Table I. Components for our ZTM build, priced in US dollars.
Item Source Price (USD)
Aluminum slabs eBay 40
Micrometer screws
and bushings (3)McMaster-Carr
(97424A590, 98625A960)51
NEMA-17 Motor Adafruit (324) 14
Stepper Motor Control Board Sparkfun (ROB12779) 16Piezo stack Thorlabs (PC4FL) 81Alumina chips Thorlabs (PKFEP4) 1Phenolic standoff Digikey (36–386-ND) 1Pt:Ir tip wire Nanoscience Instruments (20105) 12425G syringe Sanants 30–06-2505 (20-pack) 6Sample holder magnet K&J Magnetics (D54) 1OPA 124U Digikey 6Anti-vibration pad PneumaticPlus (PP-CP) 3Acoustic panels Foamily (12packacousticfoam1) 10Pre-amp printed circuit
board (custom)PCBWay 3
Totals 357
Table II. Samples purchased, priced in US dollars.Item Source Price (USD)
HOPG Nanoscience Instruments (30102) 45
Au Ted Pella (260374-G) 77 (for 2)p-type Si chips (5 /C25 mm) Ted Pella (16008) 110 (for 270)
797 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Lindgren et al. 797 04 October 2023 23:19:10
For our piezo stack (Thorlabs PC4FL), a 10-Volt range is suf-
ﬁcient to extend the piezo at least 250 nm. Likewise, the piezo
extension is approximately 0.2 ˚A=mV, allowing sufﬁcient
z-resolution for the I-zdata acquisition. The stepper motor is
attached to both the top aluminum plate and the ﬁne adjust-
ment screw, the latter of which must move independently of
the top plate. As a result, we designed and 3D-printed asliding bracket that supports the motor while allowing it tomove along with the ﬁne-adjustment screw (Fig. 2).
The tip holder is a syringe needle (25 gauge, Sanants
30-06-2505) that is epoxied onto a phenolic standoff. Tips are
mechanically cut from Pt:Ir (80:20) wire (0.2 mm diameter),as they are more inert in ambient conditions than other com-
mon tip materials like tungsten. Slightly bending the tip wire
allows it to be held ﬁrmly in the syringe. The z-piezo actuator
is attached to the standoff with a thin piece of alumina
(Thorlabs PKFEP4) sandwiched between to electrically iso-
late the two. The tunneling currents are small ( /C240:1-1:0 nA),
so to minimize noise from capacitive coupling, a very ﬁne
gold wire (40 AWG) is epoxied directly to the syringe, and
then soldered directly to the inverting input of the op-amp onthe preamp board. The sample puck is attached to the bottom
piece of the aluminum body via a conducting, nickel-coated
magnet (K&J Magnetics, D54). A short length of enameledmagnet wire (24 gauge, Fisher S4828B) applies the bias tothe sample while the tip is held at a virtual ground. For vibra-
tion isolation, the entire aluminum body sits on a rubber/cork
appliance pad (PneumaticPlus, PP-CP) and is housed in a boxlined with acoustic panels during data acquisition. The device
has only been operated in the basement of our building,
where vibrations are smallest. We have not tested it on upperﬂoors. For electrical isolation, the box is also lined with
grounded aluminum foil.
The ZTM instrument we built could interface with any
homebuilt or commercial electronics controller. In ourimplementation, we control the ZTM and acquire data via a
National Instruments USB-6259 DAQ card and LabVIEW,
infrastructure previously existing for our advanced labcourses. The 10 V output limit of the DAQ card is sufﬁcient
to extend our z-piezo at least the 250 nm necessary for the
approach algorithm described above, which prevents theneed for an additional high-voltage piezo ampliﬁer.
IV. RESULTS
Figure 3shows representative I-zcurves acquired by the
ZTM for two different materials: highly oriented pyrolyticgraphite (HOPG) and Au evaporated on glass (Table II).
Each curve in Fig. 3was acquired with a ﬁxed sample bias
of 50 mV. Students ﬁrst plot an I-zcurve on linear axes to
observe the exponential dependence on tip-sample separa-tion, as shown for HOPG in Fig. 3(a). Because ﬁnding the
precise location of the sample surface would result in a tipcrash, the current is plotted against changes in the tip’sheight above the sample surface, relative to its originalheight at the beginning of the data run, with no loss of perti-nent information. From these acquired data, students are ableto observe the exponential dependence of the tunneling cur-
rent on the tip-sample separation (i.e., the tunneling barrier
width).
As shown in Fig. 3(b), the I-zdata are linear when plotted
on semi-log axes, verifying the exponential relationships forboth HOPG and Au. Linear ﬁts to the semi-log plot in Fig.3(b) yield work functions of 0.34 eV for HOPG and 0.47 eV
for Au. These values are roughly an order of magnitudesmaller than the known work functions for each material,which are expected when performing these experiments withthe humidity levels of ambient conditions.
6Despite being
limited to ambient conditions, students still observe an expo-nential dependence that varies with different materials.
Tunneling spectroscopy is another way to probe differences
in the electronic structure of materials with the ZTM. Figure 4
consists of data acquired by advanced physics lab students aspart of their ﬁnal course projects. It shows representative I-V
curves comparing HOPG (a semimetal) with Au (a metal).The students observe differences in electronic structure con-sistent with expectations for semimetals and metals. HOPGshows an increase in the density of states at higher samplebias voltages (associated with higher energies). The I-Vchar-
acteristics of Au are of nearly constant slope, consistent withexpectations for metals. This comparison allows for discus-
sion of and experimental veriﬁcation of differences in elec-
tronic structure. Figures 4(a) and4(b) display sets of three
curves for HOPG and Au, respectively, showing that the dataacquired by students are reproducible and low-noise. Eachcurve from the set was taken at the same location on itsrespective material. Figure 4(c)compares one representative
curve from each material side by side.
The undergraduate advanced lab students analyzed the
curves in a simpliﬁed, qualitative manner as describedabove. A more accurate model for the I-Vcurves would
incorporate both the theoretical density of states and theenhanced transmission probability as the electron energy E
Fig. 4. Current versus voltage curves acquired by advanced lab students from different materials. (a) Three representative I-Vcurves acquired on HOPG. (b)
Three representative I-Vcurves acquired on Au. (c) Comparison of one Au (metal) curve with one HOPG (semi-metal) curve showing qualitative differences
in the local density of states for these materials.
798 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Lindgren et al. 798 04 October 2023 23:19:10
approaches the barrier height U. While a quantitative analy-
sis is beyond the scope of our ﬁrst-semester advanced labcourse, it may explain the weak bending at higher bias, and
it is likely the reason why the Au curves are not perfectly lin-
ear. Such a possibility was discussed qualitatively with thestudents. Overall, this portion of the experiment facilitatedinstruction and engagement in independent study on the elec-
tronic structure of materials for the ﬁrst time in the careers of
our advanced lab students.
For analysis of a semiconducting sample, the advanced
lab students chose p-type Si. Students were given some back-ground instruction on electronic band gaps in semiconduc-
tors and then predicted they would observe a band gap of
about 1.1 eV. Instead, the I-Vcurves were highly rectifying,
indicating the presence of a Schottky contact (Fig. 5).
Follow-up discussion with students about sources ofSchottky barriers explored possible causes. We note that the
sample was mounted to a stainless steel disk via conductive
epoxy with colloidal silver particles. However, a more likelyexplanation for the rectifying behavior is that the metallicPt:Ir tip came into contact with the Si surface upon approach.
The purchased p-type Si sample (Ted Pella 16008) had donor
concentrations of order 10
15–1016cm–3. The tip either depos-
ited metal on the surface or remained in a point contact con-ﬁguration. Because the experiment was performed inambient conditions, we assumed the presence of a thin, insu-
lating SiO
2layer that forms on the surface of Si outside of
high vacuum. While the layer can be thin enough to tunnelthrough, its presence would have made a tip crash moreprobable than a pristine Si surface. The observation of the
Schottky contact suggests that the ZTM could be useful for
another application in advanced lab—Point ContactSpectroscopy.
5For example, highly doped Si has previously
been used in point-contact spectroscopy studies of Schottkybarriers in vacuum.13
V. DRIFT
As is familiar with scanning probe microscopy methods,
the relative position of the tip and sample in our device mayexperience lateral and/or vertical drift. For example, thermal
expansion and contraction of the scan head components can
occur due to small temperature ﬂuctuations. Because weoperate the ZTM without a feedback loop, there is the poten-tial for signiﬁcant change in tip-sample separation (and thustunneling current) without user intervention. Attention to thispossibility is essential. Each time the tip comes into range,we examine the tunneling current as a function of time for afew minutes before acquiring data. Figure 6shows a repre-
sentative plot of the tunneling current vs time acquired with
a HOPG sample in place. Problematic changes of /C240:1n A
over 20–30 s are marked with arrows (1 and 2). However,between locations 1 and 2, the current remains stable towithin 0.1 nA for 200 s, an order of magnitude longer thanthe time it takes to acquire an I-zorI-Vcurve. To encourage
these optimal conditions, we also take care in preparing the
sample to be as ﬂat as possible, and the enclosure with
acoustic panels appears to minimize thermal drift. We alsonote that in scanning tunneling microscopy, the feedbackloop is typically shut off prior to acquisition of I-zorI-V
curves.
VI. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have built a simpliﬁed alternative to a
STM that limits tip motion to the z-axis alone—the ZTM.
This instrument can be customized to ﬁt the needs of individ-ual departments in several ways. Material costs for the ZTMare relatively inexpensive, and its required input and outputvoltages can be integrated with data acquisition tools or elec-tronics that typically exist in an instructional laboratory.
While our form factor for the body was two aluminum slabs,
the ZTM concept could be implemented in other simpleform factors that have been used to construct STMs.
1–4
Others may choose to operate the ZTM in a dry nitrogen boxor glove bag, and we presume this could improve the accu-racy of the measured work functions in the I-zdata. In addi-
tion to tunneling measurements, the ZTM may be used as an
ambient point-contact spectroscopy probe.
Regardless of speciﬁc customizations, the principle of the
z-axis tunneling microscope is useful for producing lab
equipment to study tunneling and basic electronic structure.Students using the ZTM gain experience in experimental
Fig. 5. Current versus voltage curve acquired by advanced lab students from
the p-type Si sample. The data show rectifying behavior, suggesting a
Schottky barrier.
Fig. 6. Representative plot of tunneling current versus time (HOPG sample).Here, the average current is stable to within 0.1 nA for about 200 s (betweenlocations 1 and 2 as marked). For comparison, typical I-zandI-Vsweeps
take/H1135110 s.
799 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Lindgren et al. 799 04 October 2023 23:19:10
methods of condensed matter physics, learning about elec-
tronic structure of materials, work functions, and tunnelingprobabilities. The ZTM has been used successfully in anadvanced instructional lab setting, but it may also be appro-priate for other levels of the undergraduate curriculum (e.g.,modern physics instructional lab, independent senior projects).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank George McBane for
helpful discussions and material support. This work wassupported in part by the Center for Scholarly and CreativeExcellence of Grand Valley State University.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)ORCID: 0000-0002-4937-5909.
b)ORCID: 0000-0002-6385-7744.
c)ORCID: 0000-0002-5089-1935. Electronic mail: veazeyj@gvsu.edu
1R. A. Lewis, S. A. Gower, and P. Groombridge, “Student scanning tunnel-
ing microscope,” Am. J. Phys. 59, 38–42 (1991).2P. J. Williams, D. White, and K. Mossman, “A simple scanning tunneling
microscope,” Am. J. Phys. 65, 160–161 (1997).
3T. Ekkens, “A student-built scanning tunneling microscope,” Phys. Teach.
53, 539–541 (2015).
4D. Berard, Home-built STM website, <https://dberard.com/home-built-stm/ >.
5Y. G. Naidyuk and I. K. Yanson, Point-Contact Spectroscopy (Springer,
New York, NY, 2005).
6G. Binnig, H. Rohrer, C. Gerber, and E. Weibel, “Tunneling through acontrollable vacuum gap,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 40, 178–180 (1982).
7S. I. Park and C. F. Quate, “Tunneling microscopy of graphite in air,”
Appl. Phys. Lett. 48, 112–114 (1986).
8A. Tomic, Z. Rak, J. P. Veazey, S. D. Mahanti, S. H. Tessmer, C. D.
Malliakas, and M. G. Kanatzidis, “Scanning tunneling microscopy study
of the CeTe 3charge density wave,” Phys. Rev. B 79, 085422 (2009).
9J. Bardeen, “Tunnelling from a many-particle point of view,” Phys. Rev.
Lett.6, 57–59 (1961).
10B. Voigtl €ander, “Scanning tunneling microscopy,” in Scanning Probe
Microscopy: Atomic Force Microscopy and Scanning TunnelingMicroscopy (Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2015), pp. 279–308.
11J. A. Stroscio, R. M. Feenstra, and A. P. Fein, “Electronic structure of the
Si(111)2 /C21 surface by scanning-tunneling microscopy,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
57, 2579–2582 (1986).
12See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/10.1119/
5.0094028 for the Eagle.brd ﬁle for the custom printed circuit board.
13X. Zhang, K. Wang, W. Chen, M. M. Loy, J. N. Wang, and X. Xiao,
“Electrical transport through a scanning tunnelling microscope tip and a
heavily doped Si contact,” J. Appl. Phys. 114, 013701 (2013).
AJP Index to Advertisers
AAPT Winter 2023 Meeting. . ......................... Cover 2
AAPT Membership. ................................ Page 721
AAPT ComPADRE ................................ Page 723
APSIT . . ......................................... Page 724
AAPT Career Center ...................................T O C
Princeton University Press . . . .....................F a r Forward
800 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Lindgren et al. 800 04 October 2023 23:19:10
