
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2022
An approach to graded physics colloquium assignments 
Eric W . Burkholder
Am. J. Phys.  90, 697–701 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0097099
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Fury Road: Medical Physics Education Using Film
Phys. T each.  (March 2021)
Strategies for teaching and extracurricular activities during COVID-19 transitions
J Acoust Soc Am  (October 2021)
International conference on spectroscopy 1962
Physics T oday  (October 1962) 04 October 2023 23:16:47
An approach to graded physics colloquium assignments
Eric W. Burkholdera)
Department of Physics, Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama 36849
(Received 25 April 2022; accepted 18 July 2022)
Although attending departmental seminars is a common requirement in graduate education, the
goals of this requirement are seldom explicitly stated, and its success at achieving these goals hasnot been studied. We developed a model for a graded colloquium course that encourages students
to reﬂect on the effectiveness of the presentations, since the faculty in our department stated that
one of their main goals for the students was to help them learn to give high quality presentations.
An informal survey of students ﬁnds that this goal was partially achieved and also suggests
improvements to the assignments and topics for future study.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license
by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0097099
INTRODUCTION
Graduate education in the sciences in the United States
has remained largely unchanged since the 1950s.1Common
programmatic elements include advanced coursework, semi-nars (here called colloquia), written and/or oral exams, dis-sertation research, presenting or publishing in scientiﬁcvenues, and a public thesis defense.
2,3While some have
expressed concerns about the ability of these elements tomeet the goals of doctoral education in the sciences,5there
exists relatively little research to assess the efﬁcacy of theseelements either individually or in coordination in the devel-opment of independent scientists.
4
In particular, we could ﬁnd no data related to the physics
department colloquium. However, reports on chemistry doc-
toral students suggest that as many as 40% of graduate stu-dents thought that the colloquia were “a waste of [their]time,” and they were irrelevant to their ﬁelds/careers.
6As
the authors were tasked with running the colloquium in theSpring 2022 semester at Auburn University, we were moti-vated to try a different approach that students might ﬁndmore meaningful. In our experience there are two models forcolloquia: either a low credit-hour course or a more informalweekly gathering. Within the credit model, students areassessed based on either attendance or written assignments.We chose to explore the model of written assignments.
This work describes an assignment prompt and assess-
ment structure that faculty might adopt in a graded collo-
quium course, including some informal data showing whywe chose that prompt and how it was perceived by the stu-dents. At the end of this paper, we describe some openresearch questions related to this topic that were revealedby our teaching efforts.
FACULTY SURVEY
We ﬁrst conducted an informal survey of faculty in our
home department to learn what our colleagues felt was the
purpose of colloquia. In this department, students arerequired to register for six semesters of colloquium duringtheir Ph.D. studies. The course is graded on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory basis with grades usually determined by bothattendance and writing assignments. In total, 13 facultyresponded to the survey (roughly 50% of the department).
We asked participants to describe the purpose of the collo-
quium in no more than two sentences in order to encouragefaculty to prioritize the most important purposes of the collo-
quium. Every respondent said that one purpose was to gainexposure to a variety of research topics or new problemswithin physics, particularly from areas not focused on by thedepartment. A secondary purpose, mentioned by fourrespondents, was to promote external collaborations for fac-ulty members.
We next asked participants to explain why colloquium
was a graded course for graduate students in no more thantwo sentences. Nine respondents said that it was to exposegraduate students to a wide variety of research in physics,three said that it was so students could learn how to give agood research presentation by learning from both good andbad examples, and one said there was no clear beneﬁt.
None of the faculty surveyed disagreed that colloquium
should be a requirement for graduate students, and tenagreed that colloquium is an important learning experiencefor students; the rest of the respondents were ambivalent.Only six respondents thought that the writing assignmentswere necessary for students to learn something from collo-quium, and one outright disagreed with this idea.
DEVELOPING COLLOQUIUM LEARNING GOALS
From the faculty survey, we identiﬁed three design criteria
for colloquia that seem to be supported by the majority ofrespondents: (1) there should be a wide variety of topics cov-ered by presenters; (2) there should be a writing assignmentassociated with the colloquium; (3) students should learnhow to give good research presentations. We incorporatedall three of these goals into our design but operationalizedthe last one as our learning goal: Students will be able to
identify elements of good and bad research presentationsand give recommendations on presentation content and styleto presenters. We felt that the goal of learning to give good
research presentations would increase the relevance of thecolloquium for students, and choosing a single learning goalwould narrow the scope of the changes that we made to thecolloquium.
COURSE DESIGN
The design of the colloquium course at our institution
varies depending on the instructor for that semester, but gen-erally, the grade is derived from attendance at the weeklycolloquia and writing assignments. The writing assignments
697 Am. J. Phys. 90(9), September 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 697 04 October 2023 23:16:47
were typically short summaries of the content presented in
that week’s colloquium. We opted for a grading scheme that
was 40% attendance-based and 60% based on weekly assign-
ments. The colloquium was primarily hybrid in-person/onlinewith the speaker and a small number of students and faculty
attending in person, though some talks were completely
online. There were 32 students enrolled in the course (averageattendance of enrolled students was 90%), and the averageweekly attendance was approximately 40 persons.
The weekly writing assignment was designed to support
the primary learning goal. We asked students to answer twoquestions: (1) What was the most interesting aspect of thepresentation? and (2) What advice would they give to the
speaker to better present their work in the future? This was
the assignment for the ﬁrst 11 weeks of the semester.Assignments were submitted as part of a Canvas discussionthread, and comments and interactions were encouraged by
the instructor. During week 12, we asked individual students
to compile a list of recommendations for future presenters
based on their previous writing assignments, and duringweek 13, the students and instructor met as a group to
develop a one-page list of recommendations that could be
sent to future presenters (see Fig. 1). The instructor acted as
a scribe, while the discussion was moderated by a studentvolunteer. During the ﬁnal week of the semester, students
completed a brief survey about the colloquium.
While it is likely that some of the students’ recommenda-
tions come from their own prior knowledge about good pre-sentation style (e.g., “don’t read text verbatim”), we feel that
several of the recommendations are reﬂective of more criti-
cal thinking on the part of the students, particularly the rec-ommendation to connect back to more fundamental physics
Fig. 1. List of recommendations for future colloquium speakers.
698 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Eric W. Burkholder 698 04 October 2023 23:16:47
ideas, the suggestion to use a “funnel structure,” and the
comment about logical jumps in the presentations. We alsoappreciated the students’ feedback that talks did not need tobe structured like funding pitches.
We note that the purpose of this document was twofold: it
can be distributed to future invited speakers (framed as feed-back from students to prior colloquium speakers), and it wasdistributed to all of the students to keep as a list of goodpractices while giving presentations. We also foresee waysthat the list could be developed into rubrics to use for future
colloquia and also talks the students give in their introduc-
tion to research class.
STUDENT OPINIONS ABOUT THE COLLOQUIUM
MODEL
We administered a brief survey to students at the end of
the semester to probe what aspects of the colloquium they
liked, which they did not like, and which they found usefulfor their own learning. All 32 responded. The list of ques-tions and answers appears in Fig. 2. This survey does not
align with the faculty survey as the surveys served differentpurposes: The faculty survey asked about perceived purposeof the colloquium in order to elicit ideas for changing theway colloquium is run, while the student survey wasdesigned to see students’ impressions of the intervention.
All students reported spending two hours per week or less
on colloquium (which is less than the 3 h of work allottedper credit hour), and 63% said that this was about the rightamount of work for the colloquium. About 25% said theweekly assignments created too much work. About 46%agreed that the content of the weekly colloquia was interest-ing, and only 13% said they found the content of the collo-quia relevant to their educational goals.
Positively, students appreciated the variety of topics cov-
ered in the colloquium this semester; recall that this was one
of our design goals. For example, one student said “I justappreciated the broad range of research areas in physics pre-sented this semester.” Interestingly, another said, “The phys-ics education talks this semester were the best.” It, thus,appears that they like the variety but that does not guaranteethat the talks are always interesting or relevant for students.
Despite students’ acknowledgements that the weekly writ-
ing assignments were useful for understanding how to give abetter research presentation, fewer writing assignments werethe number one thing students said they would change aboutthe colloquium. For example, one student felt condescendedto by having weekly assignments:
“Every semester, I leave feedback to the effect of,
‘The write-ups are pointless and patronizing.’ Iunderstand that there is a legitimate interest in
ensuring that students engage with the colloquium,
but the write-ups, as currently constituted, are not it.Writing 200 words about each colloquium makes mefeel like I’m pretending to be a physicist rather thanactually being a physicist. Requiring fewer write-upsthat are more thorough would potentially fix this.”
One student even went as far as to say, there should be no
writing assignments whatsoever. A small number of studentssaid they would rather have preferred a more in-depth writ-ing assignment on a small number of presentations ratherthan a weekly assignment. It is not clear to what extent thismight be biased by students’ previous experiences in which
they had only two or three writing assignments per semester.
NOTES FOR FUTURE IMPLEMENTATIONS
In the future, we will continue to have assignments where
students must critically evaluate research presentations without
spending a lot of time summarizing the physics content. We
see two possible models for this: (1) Using the list of recom-mendations made by the students as a guide, we could create a
rubric for scoring the weekly colloquia and distribute this
rubric to students. The weekly assignment could then simplybe ﬁlling out the rubric; this would still allow students to iden-
tify important elements of good presentations. We could then
distribute the aggregated results to speakers so that they know
how well their presentations were received. (2) We could give
the list of recommendations to the students and ask them towrite three reports throughout the semester on presentations of
their choice. The reports would be more in-depth and we could
ask students to address each of the points in the list of recom-
mendations. This change would address the notable criticism
in the quotation above.
AREAS OF FUTURE RESEARCH
There are several research questions that this initial
attempt at changing the prompts for colloquium assignments
has opened up.
What is the purpose of colloquium from a faculty and stu-
dent perspective? Our own survey was informal and limited
but raises an interesting question about the goals of the collo-
quium for faculty and for students. The ﬁrst question is simply
whether the purposes from students’ perspectives are aligned
with the purposes from the faculty members’ perspectives.
We also suggest a more in-depth exploration of what is
meant by the learning goals articulated by faculty in the sur-
vey, particularly the idea that “exposure” to a wide variety of
physics concepts was a goal. We have heard in various con-texts from faculty that “exposure” is a learning goal for some
physics courses; the survey suggests that is also the belief for
colloquium. We have never received a clear answer as to what
a student should be able to do after being “exposed” to a topic.
We feel that it would be appropriate to interview faculty
(and students) as a follow-up to the informal surveys to dosome more rigorous research on the goals of colloquium. One
potential investigation could be to survey faculty and students
as to whether they learned something useful after each collo-quium (either physics understanding or a presentation tip).
Students and faculty could then be put into groups after the
seminar to discuss what they learned from the talk. This might
facilitate deeper learning and appreciation for seminars among
the graduate students (and potentially increase attendance).
It is also noteworthy that the students appreciated the vari-
ety in colloquium content, but very few of them felt that the
talks were relevant to their educational goals. It may be
worth doing a more in-depth study with students to ﬁnd outwhat they ﬁnd relevant to their educational experience, and
to what extent they view it simply as a tradition. This could
be accomplished in the same interviews described above.
CONCLUSIONS
The work undertaken here represents a small ﬁrst step
in understanding the role of the colloquium in graduate
699 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Eric W. Burkholder 699 04 October 2023 23:16:47
education, student perceptions of the colloquium, and how
to make it a valuable learning experience for students.Overall, our data suggest that having students criticallyreﬂect on presentation style makes the colloquium seemmore useful to students and makes some students feellike they learned from the colloquium experience. We
urge instructors to try variations on the implementationdescribed here, and we encourage researchers to more criti-cally examine the goals of the colloquium in graduate phys-ics education.Fig. 2. End-of-semester survey given to students enrolled in coll oquium. Numbers in parentheses give the percentage of students who selected that
response.
700 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Eric W. Burkholder 700 04 October 2023 23:16:47
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)ORCID: 0000-0001-7420-4290.
1M. Kilpatrick, “Building a chemistry department. II. The graduate curricu-
lum,” J. Chem. Educ. 31(6), 313–316 (1954).2Committee on Professional Training, Survey of Ph.D. Programs in
Chemistry (American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 2008).
3M. Jacobs, “Education doctoral chemists,” Chem. Eng. News 74(42),
40–42 (1996).
4J. Harshman, “A review of the challenges that face doctoral education in
chemistry,” J. Chem. Educ. 98, 259 (2020).
5National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Graduate
STEM Education for the 21st Century (National Academies Press, 2018).
6J. Harshman and B. Busby, “Chemistry doctoral students’ perspectives of
the efﬁcacy of their programs,” JACS (under review).
701 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Eric W. Burkholder 701 04 October 2023 23:16:47
