
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkINSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| APRIL 01 2023
An economical smoke chamber and light-sheet microscope
system for experiments in fluid dynamics and electrostatics 

Karl D. Stephan  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 316 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0122766
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A dynamic modelling framework towards the solution of reduction in smoking prevalence
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2016)
The factors influencing on consumer preference towards smoke meat
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2022)
Relationship between job and smoking habits based on the CAR T method
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2018) 04 October 2023 22:51:33
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, andhow they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to the
IL&D editor for consideration.
An economical smoke chamber and light-sheet microscope system
for experiments in fluid dynamics and electrostatics
Karl D. Stephana)
Ingram School of Engineering, Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas 78666
(Received 25 August 2022; accepted 9 January 2023)
A smoke chamber and light-sheet video microscope setup is relatively easy to construct and
provides opportunities for undergraduates to participate in a variety of advanced experiments,
including the demonstration of Brownian motion and the interaction of induced electrostaticdipoles in aerosol particle agglomeration. We present results of these experiments along with
information to allow replication of the setup in undergraduate physics laboratories. A theoretical
model of the rate of aerosol agglomeration of long dipole chains as a function of electric ﬁeldagrees with experiments at ﬁeld strengths up to 200 kV m
/C01.#2023 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0122766
I. INTRODUCTION
Once students have mastered the basics of electromagnetics
and statistical physics, they can tackle more complex interdis-ciplinary experiments that combine familiar concepts withnew ones from more advanced areas of physics. Phenomena
such as Brownian motion and the related concepts of diffusion
and ﬂuid-dynamic drag can be fruitfully studied in a variety ofexperiments ranging from simple video capture of micro-spheres in puriﬁed water
1,2to more complex systems involving
quadrupole ion traps.3While these experiments can be elegant
and pedagogically rewarding, devoting time and resources tobuild a system that allows only one experiment is not alwaysthe best investment. A better approach for laboratories withlimited resources is to develop an experimental hardware base
that can be used to demonstrate an expandable variety of con-
cepts covering a number of topics.
In this paper, we present a system that allows the micro-
scopic study of aerosol particles in a variety of circumstancesthat illustrate concepts in ﬂuid dynamics, electrostatics, andaerosol science. The system uses a “light-sheet” microscope.
4
Originally developed for imaging colloidal particles smallerthan the limiting resolution of an optical system, a light-sheetmicroscope produces a thin, ﬂat beam of light perpendicular tothe line of sight of the imaging objective. Objects in the sheet’svolume appear as bright spots against a dark background, and
the resulting high-contrast images are easily processed by
automated imaging software. After the original concept wasdescribed in the early 1900s, some of the earliest aerosol-science research into the nature and concentration of smokeparticles used the light-sheet technique.
5We have developed asimpliﬁed form of this setup that can demonstrate a wide vari-
ety of phenomena in the areas of ﬂuid dynamics, electrostatics,and aerosol science.
The most costly item in the setup is a video-equipped micro-
scope. Many of the system’s other components can be fabricatedfrom scratch if necessary or procured from hardware stores. Thegenesis of this system came about during COVID-19, when myuniversity shut down all on-campus lab-based research and stu-dent involvement for the better part of 2020, and I set up a smalllaboratory at my house to pursue some ideas on my own in aero-sol interactions with electric ﬁelds. By necessity, no studentswere involved at the time. However, the fact that the systemwas built by one person (except for the occasional assistance ofmy wife) with almost no immediate outlay of signiﬁcant fundsindicates that it should be easy to duplicate elsewhere. Theequipment needed should be found in any reasonably well-equipped undergraduate physics lab: a microscope equippedwith a video recording system, some simple optics, and anoptional high-voltage power supply and vacuum pump.
With the aid of free image-analysis software, students can
perform experiments demonstrating Brownian motion andthe agglomeration of smoke particles in electric ﬁelds,among others.
Following a description of the hardware setup, we
describe these experiments and provide samples of experi-mental results.
II. EXPERIMENTAL MATERIALS AND METHODS
To produce aerosol particles of fairly consistent number
density and composition is not an easy process in general.
316 Am. J. Phys. 91(4), April 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 316 04 October 2023 22:51:33
After several unsuccessful tries using ready-made powders,
we found that MgO smoke particles produced by combustionof strips of elemental magnesium in ambient air were the
best source to use in terms of consistency and reliability.
Regarding the safety of this process, burning magnesiumshould be enclosed in a ﬁreproof enclosure and should not be
viewed at close range without eye protection. MgO smoke is
non-toxic, and the oxide is a component of many commonlyused refractory materials. If release of the small amount of
MgO smoke created in this experiment is a concern, a vac-
uum cleaner equipped with a HEPA ﬁlter can be used to cap-
ture the smoke exhausted from the system to keep it from
entering the laboratory environment.
MgO smoke consists primarily of small nearly perfect
cubes ( /C2460–100 nm on a side) intermixed with less common
larger cubes. The surface energy of MgO is about 1.1 J m
/C02,6
comparable to elemental Si, and the van der Waals forces
between small cubic crystals of MgO are correspondingly
large. Consequently, isolated cubic crystals are almost never
found in samples of MgO smoke obtained for microscopicanalysis. SEM examination shows MgO smoke particles con-
sist of interlocked chains (Fig. 1) and more complex forma-
tions (Fig. 2). These formations are quite rugged, in the
sense that while they will ﬂex and change shape under aero-
dynamic or electrostatic stress, it takes a comparatively large
force to rupture a chain.
Electrically, MgO is a good but not perfect insulator. In
addition, most materials in ambient air with relative humid-
ity (RH) above about 20% acquire at least a monolayer ofwater molecules. This monolayer can produce a nonzero
electrical conductivity for these aggregates. Crystalline MgOhas an isotropic relative permittivity of 9.9,
7so both isolated
particles and aggregates of particles will polarize signiﬁ-cantly in an electric ﬁeld. In addition to the usual dielectricpolarization induced by an externally applied ﬁeld, aerosols
can acquire a net charge from collisions with ions of either
sign. Combustion in air usually leaves a slight net charge onaerosol particles, but in our speciﬁc experiments, this chargeis equal to or less than the expected Boltzmann-distributedbipolar equilibrium charge,
8with a slight bias toward posi-
tive charge of about one electron per smoke particle, whoseaverage radius of gyration is about 10 lm.
The experimental setup used is a modiﬁed “ultra-
microscope” or light-sheet system, in which a thin slice of an
aerosol is illuminated by a beam of light that is perpendicular
to the imaging microscope’s line of sight. Figure 3shows a
photograph of the setup, including the two microscope objec-tives. The objective on the right side of the photo creates thelight sheet as a thin horizontal strip with its narrowest portiondirectly beneath the imaging-microscope objective. The lightsheet is centered between the two electrodes, which were par-
allel discs set to a spacing of 4.2 mm in most of the experi-
ments, as shown in the drawings of Fig. 4.W i t ha1 . 5 - k VD C
power supply, this spacing allowed the creation of ﬁelds up toabout 350 kV m
/C01. The optional high-voltage power supply
used should have an accuracy of about 62%. The current
drawn is only on the order of lA, so a current-limiting resistor
or other means for limiting the current to a safe value can be
placed in the power-supply circuit.
The 25 cm3smoke chamber was made of transparent
acrylic-plastic sheet and enclosed on all sides. To preventany permanent charge on the plastic sheet surface from inter-fering with the experiment, the inside of the chamber waspainted with grounded conductive paint (MG Chemicals838AR Total Ground) except for /C242 cm-diameter circular
patches masked off to allow the light source to enter and the
microscope to view the smoke, along with patches near the
electrode entry points to prevent shorting.
The light source optics were fabricated using an Eisco
Labs optical bench and attachment kit, available from
Fig. 1. Long particle chain of MgO monomers (cubic crystals).
Fig. 2. Complex of MgO particles showing multiply connected structures.
Fig. 3. Photo of smoke chamber used for studies of smoke particle chains.
The light sheet enters from the light-source objective on the right, is focused
to a thin sheet below the imaging objective, and exits into the black metalenclosure on the left. The round black-painted electrodes have a 4.2-mm gap
between them. Smoke enters through a small tube at the bottom of the cham-
ber below the light-source objective. The chamber is screw-mounted to a
yellow plastic panel that snaps into the black metal enclosure on the left for
convenient mounting and demounting. This photo was taken prior to paint-
ing the interior of the chamber with black conductive paint to reduce effects
of ﬁxed charges in the plastic walls.
317 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Karl D. Stephan 317 04 October 2023 22:51:33
sources such as hbarsci.com for less than $200, plus a
microscope objective lens. In some later experiments, avariable-focal-length InﬁniProbe microscope (model S-50)was used, but a standard microscope with a turret of vari-ous ﬁxed-focal-length objectives can be used as well.Instead of the incandescent lamp source provided with thebench kit, whose infrared radiation might cause undesir-able heating and convection within the smoke chamber, wesubstituted an intense LED lamp obtained from a low-voltage garden light of the type obtainable from hardwarestores, operating from 12 VDC. The slit and 50-mm posi-tive-focal-length lens provided with the Eisco Labs kitcombined with a 16-mm focal-length microscope objectiveto make a light sheet whose transverse dimensions wereapproximately 2.7 mm wide by 540 lm deep at the focal
point of the camera objective. More sophisticated light-sheet optics can use a laser source and a cylindrical lensinstead of a slit to produce a more intense sheet,
4but the
simpler system we used proved entirely adequate for theexperiments we performed.
Smoke was generated in a 750 cm3glass-walled combus-
tion chamber by igniting a magnesium strip weighingapproximately 22 mg with a low-voltage NiCr heater wire indirect contact with the strip. The combustion chamber wasfabricated from a one-quart canning jar with copper tubingsoldered to the steel lid and insulated bushings connecting tothe replaceable heater wire, which was procured from a hairdryer. Commercial sources of laboratory glass containersand NiCr wire can be used as well.
At ﬁrst, smoke was injected with a manually operated pis-
ton in a cylinder adapted from a basketball inﬂator pump,but this method did not allow precise control of the injectionvelocity. For some experiments, precise control is not
needed, but for the dipole-interaction experiments described
below, a fairly uniform smoke density improves repeatabilityand was obtained using plastic valves and tubing from aretail aquarium supply store.
After igniting a Mg strip to produce smoke, a sample of
the resulting smoke was then withdrawn during combustioninto a small ( /C24400 cm
3) latex party balloon by means of a
vacuum system. Referring to Fig. 5, the sampling balloon
was initially connected to the combustion chamber in posi-tionA. Valve V
2was closed, V1was opened, and the vacuum
reservoir evacuated to an absolute pressure of about 50 kPa.V
1was then closed, the Mg strip was ignited with an electri-
cal heater (not shown), and 60 s was allowed to elapse inorder for the largest smoke particles to precipitate out of thesmoke in the combustion chamber and for the remainder ofthe smoke to homogenize by convection.The smoke in the chamber was then sampled by opening
V
2, which inﬂated the balloon so that it withdrew about
300 cc of smoke from the combustion chamber. Then, V2
was closed, leaving the balloon inﬂated with smoke inside
the sampling vacuum chamber, which was under a partial
vacuum.
To inject smoke into the smoke chamber for examination,
the sampling balloon assembly was removed from Aand
connected to position B, which led through a short piece of
tubing to the smoke chamber. Valve V4had previously been
adjusted to leak only enough airﬂow into the sampling vac-uum chamber to allow the balloon to deﬂate in 65 s. To injectsmoke into the smoke chamber, V
3was opened to allow this
ﬂow rate determined by V4to gradually inject smoke into the
chamber. The small controllable leak provided by V4, thus,
allowed a smooth, constant rate of smoke injection into the
observation chamber, driven by the elasticity of the balloon.
With electrodes spaced 4.2 mm apart, the smoke moved
by laminar ﬂow in a primarily horizontal direction from theinlet port to the exhaust port. Once enough fresh smoke
entered the smoke chamber to ensure that any previous
smoke particles had been effectively purged from view,valve V
3was closed, stopping the injection of smoke and
allowing experiments to proceed.
It was not possible to fabricate the smoke chamber to
allow hermetic sealing, which would have caused problemsin any case by making the pressure in the chamber above
atmospheric. Instead, the end opposite the light source was
vented to the atmosphere. While the chamber walls isolatethe smoke inside from most exterior air currents, the fact that
the chamber is open to atmospheric pressure allows infra-
sound pressure and velocity variations to enter the chamber.For example, moving one’s hand near the chamber can cause
visible motion of the smoke particles, as will the opening of
a door in the room. So, some care is needed in choosing anacoustically quiet environment for the experiments.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Brownian motion
The theory of Brownian motion is well-developed, having
been established by Einstein in 1905.
9His theory is regarded
Fig. 4. Drawings of smoke chamber viewing toward light source (left) and
perpendicular to light source (right). Contour of light sheet is shown in red.
Fig. 5. Smoke sampling and injection system for constant-ﬂow injection ofsmoke into chamber.
318 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Karl D. Stephan 318 04 October 2023 22:51:33
as providing some of the most concrete evidence then avail-
able for the existence of atoms and molecules, and experi-
ments involving Brownian motion can reinforce key
concepts in an undergraduate physics curriculum.
Brownian motion is a diffusion process. The drag force
FDis described by Stokes’s law
FD¼3pgvd; (1)
where gis the ﬂuid dynamic viscosity, vis the velocity, and
dis the particle diameter (the particle is assumed to be spher-
ical).8Stokes’s law is valid for particles larger than about
1lm in low-velocity ﬂow, which covers most of the particles
in these experiments.
For such particles, the diffusion coefﬁcient Dis given by
the Stokes–Einstein relation
D¼kBT
3pgd(2)
in which kB¼Boltzmann’s constant. Einstein’s theory then
predicts that in the absence of any net ﬂuid ﬂow, the move-
ment of a particle in one dimension (say Dx) over a total
elapsed time Dt, if measured many times, will form an
ensemble with a Gaussian distribution whose variance r2is
given by
r2¼2DDt: (3)
The experiment consists in tracking a large number of
smoke particles using the TrackMate plugin of the free soft-ware package Fiji/ImageJ (available at https://imagej.net/
software/ﬁji/downloads ). Details of the tracking and analysis
procedures are given in the supplementary material.10
Ideally, there would be no net motion of the particles
(zeroth moment), but in an unsealed chamber this is almost
impossible to achieve due to differential room heating, drafts,
etc. However, the motion in a direction perpendicular to thenet ﬂow is due only to Brownian diffusion.11Mathematical
rotation of the original ( x,y) coordinate system through an
angle hto yield the rotated system ( x0,y0) always produces an
angle h0for which the particle motions in one of the rotated
coordinates ( x0ory0) have no average motion (zeroth moment
of zero). The data from that rotated coordinate with zero netﬂow in the rotated coordinate system can then be used to ﬁt a
Gaussian and derive a value for D.
Figure 6shows the results from one such experiment that
tracked 355 particles over an average time of Dt¼0.35 s per
particle. The data were extracted from a video with a 29.97
fps frame rate lasting a total time of 6.7 s. The Gaussian
best-ﬁt curve in a least-square sense has a standard deviationr¼0.91lm, which combined with the average Dtin Eq. (3)
yields a diffusion constant D¼1.183 /C210
/C012m2s/C01.
Equation (2)shows that the average effective diameter of
particles with this diffusion constant at T¼300 K is 20.5 lm,
which is consistent with other measurements we have made
of the average particle diameter.
Strictly speaking, with a sample of particles whose diame-
ters are Gaussian-distributed about a mean diameter d0, the
correct way to analyze the situation is to divide the sample
into small cohorts of same-size particles, derive the appropri-
ateDand Gaussian distribution in space for that cohort, and
sum up (or numerically integrate) the contributions of each
cohort. For a size distribution that is narrowly peaked aroundd0, as ours appears to be, the result of the more complex
analysis will be indistinguishable from treating the sample as
if it were monodisperse (all particles with d0).
This experiment requires only a few seconds’ worth of video
data, and the analysis process can be completed in less than30 min, not counting the time required to generate graphs.
B. Dipole–dipole interactions and particle agglomeration
As mentioned above and conﬁrmed by Brownian-motion
experiments, the average diameter of the MgO smoke par-ticles as generated by combustion is about 20 lm, although
there are a few isolated longer chains of MgO crystals ini-
tially. However, when an electric ﬁeld is applied to the
smoke, the particles acquire induced dipole moments andbegin to agglomerate in long chains. Charged particles alsobegin to precipitate onto the electrodes, although as we men-
tioned earlier, the charges on most particles are small and
precipitation becomes signiﬁcant only at very high ﬁelds,exceeding 200 kV m
/C01.
What this means is that for a ﬁeld of view covering
1–2 mm, many particles remain visible for several video
frames (50–200 ms) as they fall through the focal depth of the
imaging optics and can be studied and analyzed using Fiji/ImageJ in a variety of ways. We chose to demonstrate thiscapability of the setup by studying the degree to which long
particle chains form as a function of electric ﬁeld intensity.
The procedure followed was to inject a fresh ( <3 min old)
sample of MgO smoke into the chamber, allow it to reachapproximately zero average velocity, and then apply a cali-brated electric ﬁeld for a 20 s period. All frames during the
application of the ﬁeld were then analyzed for long chains by
means of Fiji/ImageJ.
ImageJ deﬁnes particle circularity C
Pas
CP¼4pðAreaÞ
ðPerimeter Þ2; (4)
where the area and perimeter are calculated by ImageJ
algorithms. A perfectly circular particle has a circularity of
1.0, while an ellipse has a circularity <1. We found that
Fig. 6. Experimental Brownian-motion data from 355 particles tracked dur-
ing an average tracking time of 0.35 s at room temperature. Each displace-
ment is measured for a one-frame interval of 1/29.97 ¼33.367 ms. The
least-squares-ﬁt Gaussian shown has a standard deviation r¼0.91lm,
which implies an average particle size of about 20 lm.
319 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Karl D. Stephan 319 04 October 2023 22:51:33
particles with circularity <0.3 were almost always long par-
ticle chains of the type formed by electric ﬁelds. Inthe absence of an electric ﬁeld, the fraction of particlesin all zero-ﬁeld experiments with circularity <0.3 was 6.3
/C210
/C06, a fraction far less than the percentage of chains
found under the inﬂuence of electric ﬁelds. We, therefore,chose to deﬁne a long particle chain as one with circular-ity<0.3, to discriminate between original particles and
those that have formed into long chains under the inﬂuenceo ft h ee l e c t r i cﬁ e l d .
We give a detailed analysis of the forces between dipoles
and how it inﬂuences the agglomeration of long chains in thesupplementary material.
10What may be more appealing to
undergraduate students than the mathematical details ofdipole–dipole interaction is seeing two or more dipolesapproach and connect with each other, and this type of event
occurs many times during a typical series of runs. A
sequence of stills from one video during which a ﬁeld of95 kV m
/C01was present in the light-sheet volume is shown in
Figs. 7(a)–7(h) . This sequence shows an enlarged section of
the ﬁeld of view in which a longer chain ﬁrst joins a shorterchain to its upper left and then the combination attracts athird chain to its lower right. The dynamics of the attractionprocess are such that chains with ends that are closer thanabout 100–200 lm of each other are likely to join, and the
joining process itself takes typically 50 ms or less.
Fiji/ImageJ calculates the perimeter of each particle,
which for long chains is a good proxy for twice the chainlength, as the width of chains formed by electric ﬁeldsremains close to the original particle diameter of 10–20 lm.
The data showing how particle perimeter varies with electricﬁeld can be presented in two ways, both of which we willnow illustrate with examples.Figure 8shows a summary that shows every long particle
chain (circularity <0.3) detected in each of four trials using
the following ﬁeld strengths: 0, 47.6, 95.2, 119, 143, 190,298, and 354 kV m
/C01. The x-axis is a frame number for each
20-s experimental run, ranging from 1 to 600. The y-axis is
the perimeter of each particle counted by ImageJ.
As expected, very few (only four) chains appear in the
0-V plot, but ﬁelds as small as 47.6 kV m/C01give rise to
substantially more chains. At 95.2 kV m/C01, a trend toward
larger chains showing up in later frames begins to emerge,and the density of chains increases. This trend is very clearin the 119 kV m
/C01plot, which also shows how different four
independent trials can be despite attempts to make the initialconditions similar. At 143 kV m/C01, chain formation appears
to be fairly evenly distributed throughout the length of the20-s run, but at 190 kV m/C01, a clear tendency for chain for-
mation to cluster in the early part of the trial arises. This may
not be so much that the rate of chain formation itselfdecreases, but at the higher ﬁelds, chains with nonzero netcharge will move faster toward the oppositely charged elec-trode and precipitate out of the experimental volume. Theeffect of precipitation dominating over chain formationbecomes very obvious in the 298 and 354 kV m
/C01trials, in
which most of the longest chains appear within a few sec-onds of the ﬁeld turn-on time and then disappear due to pre-cipitation to the electrodes.
Another signiﬁcant measure is the average concentration
of particle chains of any length vs the applied electric ﬁeld,again for an experiment period of 20 s. Because the initialconcentration from run to run is difﬁcult to control (the aver-age particle count in the ﬁeld of view used for all 176 trialswas 41.81 and the standard deviation was 26.12), the concen-tration of long chains is also expected to have a comparablespread. However again, a clear trend is visible in Fig. 9. The
concentration of long chains rises by two orders of magni-tude for ﬁelds as low as 50 kV m
/C01and continues to rise up
to a ﬁeld of about 200 kV m/C01. The number of chains
counted declines at higher ﬁelds, though in an irregular fash-ion. The rate of chain formation begins to increase again at354 kV m
/C01, but equipment limitations made this the highest
ﬁeld attainable with the boundary conditions and electrodegap chosen. As explained above, competition between chainformation and precipitation is at least partly responsible forthe decline in chain concentration above 220 kV m
/C01. A the-
oretical explanation of this trend based on the generaldynamic equation (GDE) proposed by Friedlander12is pro-
vided in the supplementary material,10and is the source of
the theoretical GDE points shown in Fig. 9.Two interesting
phenomena occur in longer chains when the ﬁeld is turned
off. A chain whose dipole moment has been acquired
recently via dielectric polarization and which has not yetacquired a permanent dipole moment tends to go limp,acquiring a jagged but roughly linear shape dictated by theinternal forces of the links making up the chain. However,chains that have existed long enough to allow mobile chargesto create a semi-permanent dipole moment tend to collapseinto a small lump, as the opposite charges on each end of thechain are no longer held in place by the external ﬁeld, andsuddenly attract each other instead. Figure 10shows frames
taken from such a collapse.
Finally, we will remark on the process that leads us to an
estimate of the electrical resistance of long particle chains.Some long chains that are attracted to and make contact withan electrode are observed to remain stationary and intact,
Fig. 7. Sequence of eight frames (a)–(h) (enlarged section of ﬁeld of view)
showing three separate chains merging into one about 450 lm long. Time
interval between frames: 33.367 ms. Multimedia view: https://doi.org/
10.1119/5.0122766 .
320 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Karl D. Stephan 320 04 October 2023 22:51:33
perpendicular to the electrode plane, for a time on the order
of seconds. A fraction of these then suddenly ﬂy off the elec-trode and move across to the opposite electrode in less thanone frame time (33.36 ms).
The explanation for this process is likely as follows.
When the net charge on a long chain is sufﬁcient to attractit to an electrode, the distribution of charge may be suchthat the chain remains intact upon contacting the electrode.While the chain’s induced dipole moment will not beaffected to ﬁrst order by contact with the electrode, the netcharge will be, because the chain begins to acquire chargeof the same sign as the electrode by conduction once it con-tacts the electrode. This acquired charge is of opposite signto the original net charge, and at a time when the overallforce on the chain reverses sign, the chain detaches itselffrom the electrode. Once it is detached, the same-sign net
charge acquired from the electrode furnishes a large repel-lent force that propels the chain across the gap to the otherelectrode.
An estimate of the chain’s DC resistance can be made by
estimating its capacitance C
Cwith respect to the electrode
plane and equating its dwell time on the electrode to the timeconstant of an R–C lumped-element circuit. Sugiura13gives
an expression for the capacitance of a monopole above aground plane, which if the monopole is electrically shortreduces to
C
CðpFÞ¼55:6h
lnh
a/C18/C19
/C01(5)
in which his the monopole height in meters and ais the
radius in meters. For a chain with h¼1 mm and a¼10lm,
CC¼15.4 fF. If the chain stays on the initially contacted
electrode for s¼3 s, the equivalent lumped chain resistance
RCis approximately
RC¼s
CC¼3
15:4/C110/C015¼194 GX: (6)
As the main contribution to conductivity is probably a thin
ﬁlm of water molecules adsorbed onto the surface of the
MgO particles, this high level of resistance appears to be rea-sonable. It also indicates that the charge distribution on along chain cannot be regarded as completely static but canchange slowly under some conditions due to the non-zeroconductivity of the chain. As mentioned previously, chargemigration along a chain is probably the explanation for whysome chains abruptly collapse into a small lump when theexternal ﬁeld is removed.
While the large number of experimental runs presented
here occupied most of a working day and required severaldays’ worth of analytical effort, fewer runs could be per-formed with proportionally shorter analysis times. As fortheoretical predictions, the simplest theory of which theauthor is aware dealing with agglomeration of aerosols isthat of Smoluchowski,
14which involves complex integral
Fig. 8. Perimeters (in lm) of long particle chains vs video frame number for
various electric ﬁelds in each of four independent trials.
Fig. 9. Average experimental long-chain concentration for 20 s run for four
independent trials at electric ﬁelds from 0 to 355 kV m/C01, together with sim-
ulation (hollow circles) from GDE model (for presentation of GDE analysis
see the supplementary material (Ref. 10)).
321 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Karl D. Stephan 321 04 October 2023 22:51:33
kernels and does not apply to inhomogeneous mixtures of
particles of different size, although the theory has since been
extended to such cases. In the supplementary material,10the
GDE basis for the theoretical predictions is developed to
support the theoretical curve in Fig. 9.
C. Other possible experiments
The experiments described above have been performed
and verify that the results are acceptable for use in an under-
graduate physics lab. Other possible experiments using thesame setup and analysis software will now be described.
While none of these have been performed in practice, they
would require little or no additional equipment and only amodest analytical effort to develop.
1. Laminar flow
The narrow space between the electrodes (4.2 mm in the
current setup) provides a good approximation to analyzing
transverse ﬂuid ﬂow between inﬁnite planes. The Reynoldsnumber Refor such ﬂow is given by
Re¼
qLv
l(7)
in which qis the density, Lis the characteristic length (in
this case, the space between the two planes), vis the ﬂuid
velocity, and lis the dynamic viscosity. For a ﬂow velocity
less than about v¼10 m s/C01, the ﬂow between the electrodes
is laminar. Video particle tracking is a common techniqueused for imaging ﬂow ﬁelds, and students can compare
experimental ﬂow ﬁelds measured with tracked particles
using Fiji/ImageJ to the parabolic proﬁle predicted bytheory.
15
2. Turbulent flow
Turbulence can be induced at least two ways in the setup:
(1) by injecting smoke at a velocity high enough to exceed
about 10 m s/C01in the interelectrode space or (2) by increas-
ing the electrode spacing and applying a sufﬁciently highﬁeld. Beyond a certain limit of particle density, charge, and
ﬁeld, the smoke particles cease to behave as independent
entities in an otherwise stationary medium and begin toinﬂuence each other, an effect dealt with by Fuchs16which
he terms the hydrodynamic interaction of aerosol particles.While analysis and calculations of turbulent ﬂow are notori-ously complex, a qualitative demonstration is easy to pro-duce with this setup.
3. Infrasound studies
As mentioned above, the smoke in the setup is sensitive to
low-frequency acoustic pressure disturbances. As lessthan 1 lm of particle displacement is easy to discern with a
high-magniﬁcation imaging objective, acoustic wavesof this amplitude with frequencies below 15 Hz (one-halfthe frame rate) can be detected and analyzed. Assuming aparticle excursion of 61.5lm can be easily measured, a
1-Hz infrasound with an intensity of 51 dB (with referenceto the 20- lPa 0-dB reference intensity) should be measur-
able with this setup, and lower intensities at lowerfrequencies.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
We have shown how a relatively simple and inexpensive
smoke chamber and light-sheet experimental setup can beused to perform a variety of experiments pertaining to ﬂuiddynamics, statistics, and electrostatics. We have shownquantitative agreement with theory for a Brownian-motionexperiment and an experiment demonstrating the formationof long particle chains and suggested other experiments thatcan be performed with the same setup. The agglomeration ofparticles in outer space is currently an area of activeresearch,
17as it may play an important role in the early
stages of planet formation. While conditions in these experi-ments differ from the vacuum of space, many of the princi-ples are the same, making these experiments an interestingconnection for students to current research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is grateful to the anonymous reviewers who
provided extensive, careful, and constructive criticism of anearlier draft of this paper. The author thanks Brian Samuelsfor essential assistance with production of SEM images,Robert P. Cameron and Wolfgang Loefﬂer for helpfulcomments and suggestions, and Pamela Stephan forassistance with experiments. This work was partiallysupported by the Julian Schwinger Foundation under GrantNo. JSF-16-04-0000.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)ORCID: 0000-0003-0967-3191.
1E. Wennstrom, “Development of a Brownian motion experiment for an
undergraduate laboratory course,” B.S. thesis (Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR, 2021).
2D. Germain, M. Leocmach, and T. Gibaud, “Differential dynamic micros-copy to characterize Brownian motion and bacteria motility,” Am. J. Phys.
84(3), 202–210 (2016).
3M. J. Madsen and A. D. Skowronski, “Brownian motion of a trapped
microsphere ion,” Am. J. Phys. 82(10), 934–940 (2014).
4J. M. Girkin and M. T. Carvalho, “The light-sheet microscopy revolution,”
J. Opt. 20(5), 053002 (2018).
5H. S. Patterson, R. Whytlaw-Gray, and W. Cawood, “The structure and
electriﬁcation of smoke particles,” Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 124(795),
523–532 (1929). https://www.jstor.org/stable/95228
Fig. 10. Long particle chain (length /C241 mm) collapsing after 95.2 kV m/C01
ﬁeld turned off at frame (a) (interval between frames: 33.367 ms).
Multimedia view: https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0122766 .
322 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Karl D. Stephan 322 04 October 2023 22:51:33
6A. R. C. Westwood and D. L. Goldheim, “Cleavage surface energy of {100}
magnesium oxide,” J. Appl. Phys. 34(11), 3335–3339 (1963).
7M. A. Subramanian, R. D. Shannon, B. H. T. Chai, M. M. Abraham, and M.
C. Wintersgill, “Dielectric constants of BeO, MgO, and CaO using the two-terminal method,” Phys. Chem. Miner. 16(8), 741–746 (1989).
8W. C. Hinds, Aerosol Technology: Properties, Behavior, and Measurement
of Airborne Particles , 2nd ed. (Wiley, New York, NY, 1999).
9A. Einstein, “ €Uber die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der W €arme
geforderte Bewegung von in ruhenden Fl €ussigkeiten suspendierten
Teilchen (On the movement of particles suspended in liquids at rest, as
required by the molecular-kinetic theory of heat),” Ann. Phys. 322(8),
549–560 (1905).
10See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0122766 for details of the data analysis of the Brownian-motion
experiment and details of the general dynamic equation analysis of the
long particle chain experiment, including analysis of the mutual electro-
static forces between chains.
11F. Poydenot et al. , “Turbulent dispersion of breath by the wind,” Am. J.
Phys. 90(11), 826–832 (2022).12S. K. Friedlander, Smoke, Dust, and Haze: Fundamentals of Aerosol
Dynamics , 2nd ed. (Oxford U. P., Oxford, 2000).
13A. Sugiura, M. Alexander, D. Knight, and K. Fujii, “Equivalent capaci-
tance substitution method for monopole antenna calibration,” in 2012
IEEE International Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility ,
Pittsburgh, PA (IEEE, 2012), pp. 708–713.
14M. Smoluchowski, “Drei Vortr €age €uber Diffusion, Brownsche
Molekularbewegung und Koagulation von Kolloidteilchen (Three lectures
on diffusion, Brownian motion, and coagulation of colloidal particles),”
Phys. Z. 17, 557–585 (1916). https://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015
010783705
15G. K. Batchelor, An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics (Cambridge U. P.,
Cambridge, 1967).
16N. A. Fuchs, The Mechanics of Aerosols (Pergamon, New York,
1964).
17C. Dominik, J. Blum, J. N. Cuzzi, and G. Wurm, “Growth of dust as theinitial step toward planet formation,” in Protostars and Planets V
(University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 2006).
323 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Karl D. Stephan 323 04 October 2023 22:51:33
