
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkBOOK REVIEWS| SEPTEMBER 01 2022
Are Electromagnetic Fields Making Me Ill? How Electricity
and Magnetism Affect our Health 
Are Electromagnetic Fields Making Me Ill? How Electricity and Magnetism Affect our Health. .  Bradley J.  Roth   122 pp.
 Springer ,  2022 . Price: $29.99 (paper). ISBN 978-3-030-98773-2.
Robert G. Olsen
Am. J. Phys.  90, 718–719 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0107970
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Classification of mental illness from user content on social media
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2022)
Prediction of mental health illness using machine learning for technical employees
AIP Conf. Proc.  (September 2023)
Frequency tones and elevated decibel level of tones that are indicators of ill health or a state of health with
associated pain
J Acoust Soc Am  (May 2017) 04 October 2023 23:17:33
BOOK REVIEWS
The downloaded PDF for any Review in this section contains all the Reviews in this section.
Craig F. Bohren, Editor
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802; mailing address: P.O. Box 887, Boalsburg, PA 16827; bohren@meteo.psu.edu
Are Electromagnetic Fields Making Me Ill? How
Electricity and Magnetism Affect our Health.Bradley J. Roth. pp. Springer, 2022. Price: $29.99
(paper). ISBN 978-3-030-98773-2. (Robert G. Olsen,
Reviewer.)
Many claims have been made over many years about the
interaction of electromagnetic ﬁelds with the human body.
These claims range from therapeutic to catastrophic. If youare looking for a short (mostly non-technical) introduction to
many of the controversies regarding these claims, look no
further. The author of this book tackles claims that includepain relief due to magnets, cancer from power lines, thera-
peutic use of electrical stimulation, and possible side effects
of millimeter-wave airport scanners and 5G cell phones. Itis designed for nonscientists and contains no math.
Nevertheless, it is valuable to those with a technical back-
ground but not necessarily in the speciﬁc area of bioelectro-magnetics. I heartily recommend it.
Each section begins with a short introduction to the
background science needed to understand the issue.Following this is an introduction to the speciﬁc claimsmade by the proponents and questions raised by the skep-
tics. The evidence for and against is laid out and evaluated
using the standard methods of good science. These includethe results of clinical trials, the use of well-accepted phys-
ics (e.g., the skin effect or the impact of losses on reso-
nance phenomena) to evaluate claims, the comparison ofexposure levels to known background ﬁelds (e.g., noise),
critical reviews of the literature, and meta-analyses and
expert panel reviews. When appropriate, a point/counter-point approach is used to help the reader understand argu-
ments made by proponents and skeptics. Finally, Roth
summarizes his conclusions.
While the focus is on the speciﬁc controversies listed in
the table of contents, an even more valuable contribution of
the book is the description of Roth’s methodology. Indescribing his approach to evaluating the science (or lack
thereof) behind each claim, you will learn some of the
thought processes needed to evaluate any new technology.Anyone who adopts these approaches will become a better
investigator of new claims.
For many years, I have interacted with proponents and
opponents of claims that predicted harm due to electromag-
netic ﬁeld exposure. My observations are similar to those
expressed by Roth. Good scientists are careful to evaluate allrelevant literature, while those who are not often “cherry
pick” the portion of it that ﬁts their narrative. Good scientists
also evaluate the quality of each piece of work. Are clinicaltrials double blind? Has an appropriate placebo been used?
Are the numbers large enough to make solid statistical infer-
ences? Are there concerns about the quality of anepidemiological study (e.g., case-control vs cohort)? Good
scientists also recognize that “peer review” is not enough to
ensure the quality of a paper. While peer review is bothappropriate and necessary, it is not perfect. It can be “leaky”and publication bias (i.e., positive results are more likely to
be published than negative results) is real. Furthermore,
given the variation in quality within the literature, the WorldHealth Organization (WHO) has published a set of guide-lines for its assessment of the literature in order to identify
the health risks of electromagnetic ﬁelds. They state,
“All studies, with either positive or negative
effects, need to be evaluated and judged on their
own merit, and then all together in a weight-of-evidence approach. It is important to determine
how much a set of evidence changes the
probability that exposure causes an outcome.Generally, studies must be replicated or be in
agreement with similar studies. The evidence for
an effect is further strengthened if the results from
different types of studies (epidemiology or
laboratory) point to the same conclusion ”.
As mentioned by the WHO, claims can be made stronger
(or weaker) if a study or experiment is (or is not) replicated
in another laboratory. Both proponents and opponents should
believe that replication will bolster their position, and oppo-sition to replication should be suspect. This is especially truein the biological sciences, where experiments are difﬁcult to
carry out and replication has been problematic. Also, and
consistent with the WHO guidelines, good scientists shouldalso encourage validation of theory with experiments andwill wait until this is done before vigorously promoting their
claim. Finally, good scientists should welcome the opinions
of competent scientists from other disciplines when the claimis inherently multidisciplinary.
A good example of the proper approach to sponsoring
research is the EMF RAPID program, sponsored by the fed-eral government through the Energy Policy Act of 1992 tostudy power lines and cancer issues. Funding was set aside
for independent replication of any signiﬁcant previously
reported positive results. In addition, every funded team wasrequired to have expertise in exposure assessment. Bothrequirements strengthened the results of the program. As a
ﬁnal note, I found the story of the Tucker and Schmitt exper-
iment in the book to be a true cautionary tale. They tenaci-ously improved their experiment to study whether humanscould detect a 1000 lT 60 Hz magnetic ﬁeld until it obtained
a null result. I fear that many would have stopped the experi-
ment short of this and reported an artifact rather than con-tinuing to get less and less signiﬁcant (and eventually null)results as the quality of the experiment improved. In fact,
many might not have either tried to or been allowed to pub-
lish such a “null” result.
718 Am. J. Phys. 90(9), September 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 718 04 October 2023 23:17:33
I do have one (relatively minor) correction and several
suggestions for the author. Prior to the Wertheimer and
Leeper paper,1electric power engineers were mainly con-
cerned about currents induced in the body by the electricﬁelds of power lines. Published values for maximum induced
current densities in a typical human body by vertical electric
(10 kV/m, 60 Hz) and magnetic (50 lT, 60 Hz) ﬁelds were
1.9 and 0.16 mA/m
2(for the latter at the periphery of the
chest—smaller in the middle), respectively.2The concern
shifted to magnetic ﬁelds when the Wertheimer and Leeperpaper was published. Also, while I recognize that the book is
short, there are several legitimate concerns that could have
been included. One is contact current issues, which arisewhen a person touches a large metallic object immersed in
an electromagnetic ﬁeld with an amplitude that may be
smaller than exposure standard levels. Examples of thisinclude shocks when touching objects insulated from the
earth in quasi-static electric ﬁelds and radio frequency burns
when touching resonant structures exposed to high frequencyelectromagnetic ﬁelds. Another legitimate concern is the
impact of stray voltage on milk production at dairy farms
due to issues in electrical distribution grounding.
One lingering concern I have about many of the issues dis-
cussed by Roth is that science has not effectively communi-
cated how improbable some claims are. For example, Rothstates that the power line and cancer claim has been
“debunked.” However, the fact that scientists cannot
completely rule out an effect (he quotes Foster and Moulder,who said “impossibility arguments are difﬁcult to sustain in
biology”) leads to other problems. Given this fact, the (some-
times, somewhat ambiguous) summaries of expert panelscan be used in ways that were unintended by their members.
Perhaps the most relevant example is that the International
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) publishes lists ofagents or exposures considered to be carcinogenic. Both
extremely low frequency (ELF) magnetic ﬁelds and radio
frequency (RF) electromagnetic ﬁelds are listed as “Group2B (possible) carcinogens.” A close examination of the crite-
ria used for identifying these exposures in a particular group
provides the proper context for the word “possible.” A friendwho was a member of the ELF panel told me that the panelvoted for the 2B Group (possible) carcinogen rather than the
2A Group (probable) carcinogen because the evidence wasso thin. However, these listings by an international body
such as IARC are often used in public meetings (without
proper context) to give credence to the claim that ELF andRF electromagnetic ﬁeld exposures are quite dangerous. Asa result of this improper usage, ELF and RF exposure issuesmust still be dealt with by the power and communicationsindustries, costing them appreciable time and effort.Furthermore, there is still a great deal of suspicion (or even
hostility) among at least some elements of the public to these
industries. For example, electrical utilities (as part of anenvironmental impact statement) must estimate the magneticﬁeld of proposed power lines. Also, they may still be subjectto lawsuits relating to exposure to ELF magnetic ﬁelds. Asto cell phones, many cities (including my own, where I am a
member of the Planning Commission) are spending consider-
able time discussing regulations for 5G base station installa-tions despite having been told that standards approved by theFederal Communications Commission must be used. As aﬁnal note, coffee was removed from the list of IARC Group2B carcinogens in 2016. Perhaps the same might happen forELF and RF electromagnetic ﬁeld exposures.
In summary, this book is a good introduction to the subject
and is worth your time to read.
Robert G. Olsen is an emeritus professor of electrical engi-
neering and computer science at Washington State
University. He is an IEEE Fellow and the book review editor
for the IEEE Electromagnetic Compatibility Magazine .H e
has been an NSF Faculty Fellow at GTE Laboratories in
Waltham, MA, a visiting scientist at ABB Corporate
Research in V €astera ˚s, Sweden and at the Electric Power
Research Institute (EPRI) in Palo Alto, CA, and a Visiting
Professor at the Technical University of Denmark. He is the
author of the recently published two-volume book, High
Voltage Overhead Transmission Line Electromagnetics .
1N. Werthheimer and E. Leeper, “Electrical wiring conﬁgurations and child-
hood cancer,” Int. J. Epidemiol. 109, 273–284 (1979).
2EPRI, Transmission Line Reference Book, 345 kV and Above , 2nd ed.
(Electric Power Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA, 1982).
719 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 A. Small and K. S. Lam 719 04 October 2023 23:17:33
