
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| FEBRUARY 01 2022
Band formation and defects in a finite periodic quantum
potential 
Todd K. T imberlake ; Neilson W oodfield
Am. J. Phys.  90, 93–102 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0006391
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Scattering from a locally periodic potential
American Journal of Physics  (October 1992)
Role of higher ‐ multipolarity deformations in the properties of ‘octupolly’ deformed nuclei
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 1987)
Cluster Sums for the Ising Model
J. Math. Phys.  (December 2004) 04 October 2023 23:01:27
Band formation and defects in a finite periodic quantum potential
Todd K. Timberlakea)and Neilson Woodfield
Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Geology, Berry College, Mount Berry, Georgia 30149-5004
(Received 12 August 2020; accepted 3 September 2021)
Periodic quantum systems often exhibit energy spectra with well-deﬁned energy bands separated
by band gaps. The formation of band structure in such periodic systems is usually presented in thecontext of Bloch’s theorem or through other specialized techniques. Here, we present a simple
model of a ﬁnite one-dimensional periodic quantum system that can be used to explore the
formation of band structure in a straightforward way. Our model consists of an inﬁnite square well
containing several evenly spaced identical Dirac delta wells, both attractive and repulsive. We
solve for the energy eigenvalues of this system directly and show the formation of band structureas the number of delta wells increases as well as how the size of the bands and gaps depends on the
strength of the delta wells. These results are compared to the predictions from Bloch’s theorem. In
addition, we use this model to investigate how the energy spectrum is altered by the introduction oftwo types of defects in the periodicity of the system.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006391
I. INTRODUCTION
In a crystalline solid, individual atoms combine to form
regular arrangements. We can imagine constructing a one-dimensional crystal by starting with a single atom and thensuccessively adding more and more identical atoms equally
spaced along a line. While isolated, each of these atoms has
the same set of bound state energy eigenvalues. However,as the second atom is brought closer to the ﬁrst, each level ofthe isolated atom will split into two distinct levels in thecombined system of two closely spaced atoms, with the
amount of splitting depending on the interatomic separation.
For a system of Nclosely spaced atoms, each isolated level
splits into Ndistinct levels, and as Nbecomes very large, the
split levels form a practically continuous band of energyeigenvalues.
1Each band is typically separated from adjacent
bands by a noticeable gap. This process is sometimes called
the level splitting route to band formation. Level splittingand band structure can also occur in acoustical systems andsystems of coupled classical oscillators.
2–4
Energy bands and band gaps play important roles in deter-
mining the properties of a solid, such as its electrical conduc-
tivity. In insulators, the highest-energy levels occupied by
electrons in the ground state of the solid completely ﬁll oneband (the valence band), which is separated by a large gapfrom the band containing the lowest-energy levels that areunoccupied in the ground state (the conduction band).
Thermal energies are not sufﬁcient to excite electrons from
the valence band into the conduction band, so these materialsdo not conduct electricity. Semiconductors have a small gapbetween the valence and conduction bands, so the electronscan be thermally (or otherwise) excited into the conduction
band. In metals, there is no gap between the highest occupied
levels and the lowest unoccupied levels (for example, if aband is only partially ﬁlled when the solid is in its groundstate), so the electrons can easily be excited to higher levelsand these materials conduct electricity quite well.
A detailed understanding of the formation of band struc-
ture can be gained by investigating quantum mechanical sys-
tems with spatially periodic potential energy functions.
Students are typically introduced to these models in the con-text of Bloch’s theorem.
5,6Bloch’s theorem provides amethod for determining the band structure of a perfectly
periodic quantum system using only knowledge about the
potential energy in a single unit cell. A classic example ofthe application of Bloch’s theorem is the derivation of bandstructure in the Kronig–Penney model, which consists ofperiodic rectangular barriers.
7However, Bloch’s theorem is
somewhat abstract and may be difﬁcult for novice quantum
mechanics students to understand, and other methods for
deriving the band structure of a perfectly periodic quantumsystem may be similarly challenging.
8,9
Another aspect of Bloch’s theorem that may be confusing
for novice students is that it applies exactly only to inﬁniteperiodic systems. A ﬁnite system has boundaries, or surfaces,that necessarily disrupt the periodicity. Several methods
have been presented for computing energy eigenvalues in
ﬁnite periodic systems to illustrate level splitting and the for-mation of band structure, but these involve analytical techni-ques or numerical methods that may be unfamiliar tostudents.
10–12Other studies examine transmission resonances
in the scattering of particles passing through ﬁnite periodic
potentials.13–19These scattering studies show the energy
ranges for the incident particle that give rise to near-perfecttransmission, while other energy ranges produce almost notransmission; these transmission bands are closely related tothe energy bands for the periodic potential.
20Some of these
scattering studies use fairly elementary methods, but they do
not directly show the formation of band structure in theenergy spectrum.
Another problem with the methods mentioned above is
that they do not allow for the investigation of defects in theperiodic system. A defect is simply a disruption of the peri-
odicity in the (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) potential energy function of
the system. Although the boundaries of a ﬁnite periodic sys-tem represent one type of defect, many other types of defectsexist in real solids. For example, an atom in the solid may bedisplaced from its usual location (Frenkel defect) or it maybe missing altogether (vacancy defect). Another important
example is a substitutional defect or impurity defect, when
an atom in the perfect solid is replaced with a different one.Defects can play an important role in determining the proper-ties of a solid. In fact, the doping of semiconductors to alter
93 Am. J. Phys. 90(2), February 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 93 04 October 2023 23:01:27
their properties involves the intentional introduction of
impurities into the semiconductor crystal. Some prior studies
have investigated impurity-type defects in simple one-
dimensional systems, but these studies make use of numeri-cal methods that are likely unfamiliar to students.
21,22
In this paper, we present a very simple model for investi-
gating the level-splitting route to band formation in a ﬁnite
periodic quantum potential built from two potentials widelyused for quantum mechanics pedagogy: the inﬁnite square
well and Dirac delta wells.
23In Sec. II, we present the inﬁ-
nite version of this model without the square well and dis-cuss the results of Bloch’s theorem. In Sec. III, we add the
square well to impose boundaries and show how the energy
eigenvalues of the resulting ﬁnite system can be found usingelementary methods. Then in Sec. IV, we show that this
model exhibits level splitting as the number of delta wells is
increased, and we investigate how the size of the energybands depends on the strength of the delta wells. A similar
approach was taken in Ref. 24, but that study employs delta
barriers rather than delta wells. The use of delta wells givesrise to negative-energy eigenstates that mimic the boundstates of real atoms (although, unlike real atoms, an isolated
delta well supports only one bound state).
25Finally, in Sec.
V, we use this simple model to investigate two types of
defects: strength defects which are similar to impurities, and
position defects which are similar to Frenkel defects. A dis-
cussion of the energy eigenfunctions in these models, as wellas the computer code for carrying out all of the calculations,
is provided in the supplementary material.
26
II. INFINITE PERIODIC MODEL
The model we will examine consists of a sequence of
Dirac delta wells. The potential energy function for each
delta well is
ViðxÞ¼/C0 aidðx/C0diÞ; (1)
where aiis the “strength” of each well and dispeciﬁes the
location of each well. The diare always assumed to be well-
ordered such that diþ1>difor all i. The truly periodic ver-
sion of our model consists of an inﬁnite number of these
delta wells, each with identical strength ai¼aand with di
¼iafor some uniform spacing a. In what follows, we will
continue to use di,ai, etc., so that we can easily adapt our
model to include boundaries and defects.
We want to ﬁnd the energy eigenvalues Eand eigenfunc-
tions /ðxÞof this system. The eigenfunctions must satisfy
the time-independent Schr €odinger equation (TISE),
/C0/C22h2
2md2
dx2/ðxÞþX
iViðxÞ/ðxÞ¼E/ðxÞ: (2)
To make our model dimensionless, we introduce the
dimensionless coordinate q¼x=a. We also deﬁne bi¼di=a,
so for our periodic model bi¼i. We can rewrite Eq. (1)in
terms of these dimensionless quantities,
ViðaqÞ¼/C0ai
adðq/C0biÞ; (3)
where we have made use of the identity dðaqÞ¼dðqÞ=jaj.
The TISE (Eq. (2)) for our scaled model becomes/C0/C22h2
2ma2d2
dq2wðqÞ/C01
aX
iaidðq/C0biÞwðqÞ¼EwðqÞ;
(4)
where wðqÞ¼ﬃﬃﬃap/ðaqÞis a dimensionless wave function.
We can rewrite Eq. (4)as
d2
dq2wðqÞþX
ibidðq/C0biÞwðqÞ¼/C0 ewðqÞ; (5)
where bi¼2maai=/C22h2is the scaled well strength and
e¼2ma2E=/C22h2is the scaled energy eigenvalue, both of which
are dimensionless.
To solve for the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions, we ﬁrst
break up wðqÞinto pieces divided by the locations of the
delta wells. Each piece wjðqÞis deﬁned on the subinterval
bj<q<bjþ1. Within each subinterval, Eq. (5)reduces to
d2
dq2wjðqÞ¼/C0 ewjðqÞ: (6)
Ife>0, then the solution to Eq. (6)can be written as
wþ
jðqÞ¼Aþ
jsinkðq/C0bjÞ/C0/C1þBþ
jcos kðq/C0bjÞ/C0/C1;(7)
where e¼k2.I fe<0, then the solution to Eq. (6)can be
written as
w/C0
jðqÞ¼A/C0
je/C0jðq/C0bjÞþB/C0
jejðq/C0bjÞ; (8)
where e¼/C0j2.
We require that wðqÞbe continuous everywhere.
Continuity at the locations of the delta wells implies that
wi/C01ðbiÞ¼wiðbiÞ: (9)
At the locations of the delta wells, dw=dqcan be discontinu-
ous, but the discontinuity must satisfy the condition,27
lim
/C15!0dw
dq/C12/C12/C12/C12
q¼biþ/C15/C0dw
dq/C12/C12/C12/C12
q¼bi/C0/C15 !
¼/C0bilim
/C15!0ðbiþ/C15
bi/C0/C15dq/C0biðÞ wqðÞdq; (10)
or
dwi
dq/C12/C12/C12/C12
q¼bi/C0dwi/C01
dq/C12/C12/C12/C12
q¼bi¼/C0biwiðbiÞ: (11)
Note that Eq. (11) gives a discontinuity in dw=dqif
wðbiÞ6¼0, but if wðbiÞ¼0, then dw=dqis continuous at q
¼biand it is as though the delta well is not even there.
Bloch’s theorem states that the energy eigenfunctions for
the inﬁnite periodic system satisfy wðqþ1Þ¼eiKwðqÞ,
where Kis any real number.5From this condition, with the
general solution given in Eq. (7)and the conditions given by
Eqs. (9)and(11), one can show that the positive energy
eigenvalues are given by e¼k2where kis a solution to
cosðKÞ¼cosðkÞ/C0b
2ksinðkÞ: (12)
94 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 T. K. Timberlake and N. Woodfield 94 04 October 2023 23:01:27
Since Kcan have any real value, the left side of Eq. (12)can
take on any value between /C01 and 1. Thus, the values of k
such that the right side of Eq. (12)is between /C01 and 1 give
valid solutions (within the “Bloch band”), while the valuesofkfor which this condition does not hold are not valid solu-
tions (outside of the Bloch band, thus forming a gap). The
limits of the Bloch bands can be determined by ﬁnding the
values of kthat make the right side of Eq. (12)exactly equal
to61. Note that k¼npmakes the right side of Eq. (12)
equal 1 for any integer n.
We also can apply Bloch’s theorem to the negative energy
states of the inﬁnitely periodic version of this system, this
time using Eq. (8)along with the conditions given by Eqs.
(9)and(11). The resulting energies are given by e¼/C0j
2
where
cosðKÞ¼coshðjÞ/C0b
2jsinhðjÞ: (13)
Again, the limits of the (single) Bloch band are found when
the right side of Eq. (13)is equal to 61.
III. FINITE PERIODIC MODEL
In the ﬁnite version of our model, we include only a ﬁnite
number of delta wells, located at bi¼ifori¼1;2;…;N.
We then impose hard boundaries at q¼b0¼0 and
q¼bNþ1¼Nþ1, effectively embedding our system of
delta wells inside an inﬁnite square well of width Nþ1i n
our scaled distance units. The scaled potential energy for our
model is shown in Fig. 1. Note that the spacing between the
outermost delta wells and the hard walls is equal to the spac-ing between the delta wells. Thus, the hard walls impose aboundary (or surface) that makes the system ﬁnite but insuch a way as to minimize the disruption of the system’s
periodicity. The wave functions will be divided into Nþ1
pieces, w
i, with i¼0;1;…;N. At the boundaries, the wave
function must go to zero, so we have
w0ð0Þ¼0 (14)
and
wNðNþ1Þ¼0: (15)
Due to the boundaries, our ﬁnite model is no longer peri-
odic. Therefore, we cannot use Bloch’s theorem and mustinstead employ more direct methods for determining our
energy eigenvalues and eigenfunctions. For e>0, our eigen-
function still takes the form given in Eq. (7). Using this solu-
tion, Eq. (14) gives Bþ
0¼0. Since we are not worried about
obtaining normalized eigenfunctions, we let Aþ
0¼1.
Equations (9)and (11) then give a system of equations
whose solution can be written in the matrix form as
Aþ
i
Bþ
i !
¼Tþ
i;i/C01Aþ
i/C01
Bþ
i/C01 !
; (16)
where
Tþ
i;i/C01¼ci/C0bi
ksi/C0si/C0bi
kci
si ci0
@1
A; (17)
andci¼cosðkðbi/C0bi/C01ÞÞwhile si¼sinðkðbi/C0bi/C01ÞÞ. The
matrix Tþis known as a transfer matrix.28Note that the
Bloch equation (Eq. (12)) for the inﬁnite periodic system can
be derived by setting cos ðKÞ¼TrðTþÞ=2.
We can then determine the coefﬁcients for any portion of
the energy eigenfunction using
Aþ
n
Bþn !
¼Yn
i¼1Tþ
i;i/C011
0 !
: (18)
Equation (18) can be used to ﬁnd Aþ
NandBþ
Nin terms of k.
Equation (15)then gives
Aþ
NsinkðNþ1/C0bNÞ ðÞ þ Bþ
NcoskðNþ1/C0bNÞ ðÞ ¼ 0:
(19)
Equation (19)is a transcendental equation that can be solved
numerically using standard root-ﬁnding algorithms to ﬁnd
the allowed values of k, of which there will be an inﬁnite
number. Once a value of kthat solves Eq. (19) has been
determined, we can then compute the scaled energy eigen-value using e¼k
2. The (unnormalized) energy eigenfunc-
tion is the piecewise function deﬁned by Eq. (7)with values
forAþ
nandBþ
n, for n¼1;…;N, found using Eq. (18).
The procedure is similar for ﬁnding solutions with e<0
except that the eigenfunction takes the form given in Eq. (8).
Using this solution, Eq. (14)gives B/C0
0¼/C0A/C0
0. Since we are
not worried about obtaining normalized eigenfunctions, weletA
/C0
0¼1 and B/C0
0¼/C01. The transfer matrix for the nega-
tive energy solutions is
T/C0
i;i/C01¼1þbi
2k/C18/C19
e/C0jðbi/C0bi/C01Þbi
2kejðbi/C0bi/C01Þ
/C0bi
2ke/C0jðbi/C0bi/C01Þ1/C0bi
2k/C18/C19
ejðbi/C0bi/C01Þ0
BBBB@1
CCCCA:
(20)
The coefﬁcients for the eigenfunction are given by
A
/C0
n
B/C0n !
¼Yn
i¼1T/C0
i;i/C011
/C01 !
: (21)
Equation (21) can be used to ﬁnd A/C0
NandB/C0
Nin terms of k.
Equation (15)then givesFig. 1. Diagram illustrating the model potential for b>0: an inﬁnite square
well with hard walls at q¼0 and q¼Nþ1 and delta wells located at q¼bi
fori¼1;…;N. For the periodic version of the model, bi¼i.
95 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 T. K. Timberlake and N. Woodfield 95 04 October 2023 23:01:27
A/C0
Ne/C0jðNþ1/C0bNÞþB/C0
NejðNþ1/C0bNÞ¼0: (22)
Equation (22) is again a transcendental equation that can be
solved numerically to ﬁnd the allowed values of k, but this
time there will be at most Nsolutions.
Once a value of kthat solves Eq. (22) has been deter-
mined, we can then compute the scaled energy eigenvalueusing e¼/C0j
2. The (unnormalized) energy eigenfunction is
the piecewise function deﬁned by Eq. (8)with values for A/C0
n
andB/C0
n, for n¼1;…;N, found using Eq. (21).
In addition to the positive and negative energy solutions, it
is possible for this model to admit nontrivial energy eigen-
functions with zero energy.29–32A zero-energy eigenfunction
will be a piecewise linear wave function given by
w0
jðqÞ¼A0
jþB0
jðq/C0bjÞ: (23)
Equation (14) gives A0
0¼0, so to get unnormalized solu-
tions, we let B0
0¼1. The transfer matrix for the zero-energy
solution is
T0
i;i/C01¼1 bi/C0bi/C01
/C0bi 1/C0biðbi/C0bi/C01Þ !
: (24)
The coefﬁcients for the eigenfunction are given by
A0
n
B0n !
¼Yn
i¼1T0
i;i/C010
1 !
: (25)
Equation (25)can be used to ﬁnd A0
NandB0
N. The value of
the wave function at the right wall ( q¼Nþ1) is then
w0
NðNþ1Þ¼A0
NþB0
NðNþ1/C0bNÞ: (26)
IfwðNþ1Þ¼0, then the system admits a zero-energy
eigenfunction given by Eq. (23).I fwðNþ1Þ6¼0, then the
system does not admit a zero-energy eigenfunction other
than the trivial solution wðqÞ¼0. There can be at most one
nontrivial zero-energy eigenfunction in our model with agiven set of parameters.
IV. LEVEL SPLITTING AND BAND FORMATION
A. Increasing the number of delta wells
We begin our investigation of the ﬁnite periodic model by
exploring the phenomenon of level splitting. Level splitting
occurs when a perturbation to a system causes two previ-
ously identical (degenerate) energy levels to split into dis-tinct ones. Level splitting can occur when two quantum
subsystems with identical energy levels are allowed to inter-
act with each other. The interaction breaks the degeneracy inthe energy eigenvalues and as a result the combined systemwill have two different energy eigenvalues in place of the
single eigenvalue that existed in each subsystem without
interaction. In effect, a single energy level is split into twolevels as a result of the interaction between the subsystems.
The separation between the two split levels will generally
depend on the strength of the interaction between the twosubsystems.
In our simple model, level splitting occurs as we increase
the number of delta wells Nin the system. The hard walls
and the delta wells are periodically spaced so that b
i¼i.Thus, as we add more delta wells we are also increasing the
width of the inﬁnite square well, which is always Nþ1. The
spaces between the hard walls and the delta wells, or
between adjacent delta wells, can be viewed as quantum sub-
systems. If these segments did not interact, then each wouldconstitute an inﬁnite square well of unit width in qwith
scaled energy eigenvalues given by
e
ISW
j¼p2j2: (27)
The delta wells, however, are not hard walls. They permit
coupling between these quantum subsystems, and thestrength of that coupling is determined by the strength ofthe delta well. Smaller values of blead to stronger cou-
pling, and as b!0, the system becomes an inﬁnite square
well of width Nþ1. As b!61, the coupling between
the subsystems vanishes and the full system degeneratesinto a collection of Nþ1 inﬁnite square wells each with
unit width.
33,34
To illustrate level splitting in our simple model, we will
examine the energy eigenvalues of the system for ﬁnite bas
we increase the number of evenly spaced delta wells N.W e
choose bi¼10 for all of the delta wells. Figure 2shows the
4Nþ4 lowest energy eigenvalues for the system as N
increases from 0 to 9.
ForN¼0, the energies are just the eigenvalues for the
ISW with unit width, as expected. Now consider what hap-pens as we change to N¼1. By moving to N¼1, we change
the width of the ISW from 1 to 2 in our dimensionless units.As a result of this change, we might expect all of the ener-
gies to decrease by a factor of four. For the even-numbered
states, which are states of odd symmetry (see Ref. 26), this is
exactly what happens. For example, the n¼2 state for N¼0,
which has e¼4p
2, drops to an energy of e¼p2forN¼1.
Similarly, the n¼4 state for N¼0 with energy e¼16p2
drops to e¼4p2forN¼1. However, the odd-numbered
(even symmetry) states do not follow this pattern. Thesestates are strongly affected by the presence of the attractive
delta well, which signiﬁcantly reduces the energies of these
states below what we might expect from the changes in theISW alone. In the case of the n¼1 state for N¼0, the addi-
tional reduction in energy caused by the delta well makes theenergy for this state negative when N¼1. In fact, this state
ends up with an energy e/C25/C0b
2=4, which is the energy of a
bound state for a single, isolated delta well.35Meanwhile,
the energy of the n¼3 state is reduced so that it is only
slightly greater than that of the n¼2 state for N¼1.
The end result of the move from N¼0t oN¼1 is that the
n¼1 state drops to a negative energy, while the other energy
levels form pairs, one with an energy equal to a unit-widthISW energy and the other slightly greater. Thus, it appears asthough each of the N¼0 levels has “split” to form two lev-
els, with an additional negative energy level appearing when
N¼1. As we move to N¼2, we see a similar pattern: all lev-
els decrease in energy because the ISW has increased inwidth from 2 ato 3a, but most levels are decreased further
due to the inﬂuence of the new delta well. The end result is
that for N¼2, each ISW level has split into three levels that
are close to each other but separated from the groups associ-ated with different ISW states. Likewise, the negative energylevel from N¼1 has split into two closely spaced levels, as
can be seen in Fig. 3, which shows a detail of the negative
energy levels from Fig. 2.
96 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 T. K. Timberlake and N. Woodfield 96 04 October 2023 23:01:27
Figure 2makes it clear that the energy eigenvalues for the
unit-width ISW (i.e., the eigenvalues for the N¼0 case with
energies given by Eq. (27)) are always eigenvalues for the
system, regardless of the value of N.36The eigenfunctions
associated with these energies are sinusoidal functions that
go to zero at the locations of the delta wells, so the delta
wells have no effect on these states (see Eq. (11)). The eigen-
functions for the other levels in each group do not have thisproperty and thus do change as Nchanges.
AsNincreases further, we see that each ISW level is split
into a group of Nþ1 levels, while the negative energy levels
form a single group of Nlevels. Each group of eigenvalues
spans a limited range of energy. For e>0, the energy of the
ISW state sets the lower limit for this range, while the upper
limit increases with N. However, Fig. 2shows that the upper
limit approaches a limiting value as Nbecomes very large.
The energy range spanned by a group of levels associatedwith a particular ISW state can be thought of as an “energy
band,” and there are noticeable “gaps” between the bands. In
the limit N!1 , each band would deﬁne a practically con-
tinuous range of energy eigenvalues for the system, but thegaps between the bands would persist, showing that even inthe limit of an inﬁnite number of delta wells, there are some
energies that are not permitted.
The width of each energy band is approximately equal to
twice the separation between the two levels in that band forN¼1. In fact, if we ignore the ISW state, the pattern of
energy levels for N/C211 appears to be nearly symmetric
around the new level that appears at N¼1, although this
symmetry is somewhat distorted by the presence of the ISW
state which forms a lower bound for the energy band. Thus,by solving the system with a single delta well we can get agood estimate for the location and size of each energy bandfor the case with an arbitrary number of delta wells.
Note that the widths of the bands increase as energy
increases, and thus the band gaps are smaller at higher ener-
gies. We have already noted that the coupling between sub-
intervals that leads to level splitting depends on the value ofb, with larger values of bproducing smaller coupling and
thus smaller bands (and larger gaps). However, the couplingbetween subintervals also depends on the particle’s energy.At higher energies, the coupling will be stronger because ahigh-energy particle can more easily pass from one subinter-
val to another. In terms of scattering, the transmission coefﬁ-
cient for a particle to be transmitted across a delta well iscloser to one when the particle has higher energy.
37This
stronger coupling between the subintervals leads to widerbands and narrower gaps at higher energies.
For comparison, we show in Fig. 2the limits of the bands
derived from Bloch’s theorem (see Sec. II). In Fig. 2, we see
that the ISW states lie at the bottom of each positive-energy
band, in perfect agreement with the results from Bloch’s the-orem. The ISW states are eigenstates of the inﬁnite systemand they remain so for the ﬁnite system because we haveeffectively replaced two delta wells in the inﬁnite systemwith hard walls, but the ISW states already have nodes at
those locations so they remain unchanged. In contrast, we
see that the highest-energy state in each band fails to reachthe upper limit of the Bloch band. Thus, we see that the tran-sition from an inﬁnite periodic system to a ﬁnite one as aresult of introducing the inﬁnite square well boundaries leadsnot only to a ﬁnite number of states in each band but also aslight decrease in the upper limit of each band.
The negative energy levels are also conﬁned to a band of
ﬁnite width, but in this case the band is quite narrow with all
of the states close to the bound state energy for a single iso-lated delta well, as shown in Fig. 3. There is an intuitive rea-
son for the rather minimal level splitting for the negativeenergies. Bound state wave functions for a delta well areexponentially localized near the location of the well, so as
two wells are brought together there will be minimal overlap
of these wave functions and thus only weak coupling andsmall level splitting. Like the positive energy bands, theFig. 2. Lowest 4 Nþ4 energy eigenvalues ( en) as a function of the number
(N) of evenly spaced delta wells all with b¼10. The solid (red) lines are the
boundaries of the Bloch bands.Fig. 3. Detail of Fig. 2showing the negative energy eigenvalues ( en)a sa
function of the number ( N) of evenly spaced delta wells, all with b¼10.
The solid (red) lines are the boundaries of the Bloch bands.
97 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 T. K. Timberlake and N. Woodfield 97 04 October 2023 23:01:27
negative energy band is nearly symmetric around the level
that appears at N¼1. The Bloch limits for the negative
energy states are shown in Figs. 2and3. It is clear that the
negative energy eigenvalues lie within a band that is some-what narrower than the Bloch band but which approaches
the limits of the Bloch band as Nis increased.
B. Changing delta well strength
In Sec. IV A, we explored how increasing the number of
delta wells leads to the formation of energy bands separated
by band gaps in the eigenvalue spectrum. Now we will
explore how changing the strength of the delta wells affectsthe eigenvalue spectrum. Figure 4shows the 40 lowest
energy eigenvalues as a function of bfor our model system
with N¼9 evenly spaced delta wells each of strength b. The
results for b¼10 in Fig. 4correspond to the results for
N¼9 in Fig. 2.
Note that Fig. 4displays four horizontal lines: these are
the unit-width ISW eigenvalues (Eq. (27)) for j¼1 to 4. The
corresponding eigenfunctions all go to zero at the locations
of the delta wells, so they are unaffected by changes in b
(see Eq. (11)). However, the eigenvalues for all other states
move toward lower energies as bis increased and toward
higher energies as bis decreased. This makes sense given
the deﬁnition of the potential in Eq. (1). In a one-dimensional system like our model, there can be no degener-
acies (two different eigenstates with the same eigenvalue),so it is impossible for the eigenvalue curves in Fig. 4to cross
each other. As a result, for a large positive b,the eigenvalues
push downward into the ISW states, forming compact energybands with the ISW states as the lower bound and large gapsbetween the bands. Similarly, for a large negative b(such
that the delta “wells” become “barriers”), the non-ISW
eigenvalues push upward to form compact bands with theISW states as the upper bound and large gaps between thebands. In the limit b!61, the positive energy states will
all become degenerate with the ISW states as the system
becomes a set of Nþ1 uncoupled ISWs with unit width and
the Pauli exclusion principle no longer prohibits this“coexistence degeneracy.”
33When b¼0, the eigenvalues
are just those for an inﬁnite square well with width Nþ1
and there are no bands or gaps.
Note that there is no ISW state with negative energy, so
for a positive b,there is no lower bound to halt the move-
ment of the negative energy eigenvalues. Instead, theseeigenvalues continue to decrease as bincreases. In fact, these
negative energy eigenvalues will cluster around e¼/C0b2=4,
which is the energy of the bound state for a single isolateddelta well with strength b.A s bincreases, the cluster
becomes more compact, and for large values of b,the eigen-
values are nearly (but not actually) degenerate. For small
values of b,the cluster is more spread out, and for sufﬁ-
ciently small positive values of b,some of the states in this
cluster will have positive energies. For b¼2, one of these
states has e¼0. Although it is not obvious from Fig. 4, all
of the states have e>0 for b</C15where /C15is a small positive
number. This result illustrates the fact that, although an iso-lated delta well always supports a bound state for any b>0,
a delta well placed inside an inﬁnite square well may not
support a bound state if bis small or if the boundaries are
close to the delta well.
Figure 4also shows the limits of the Bloch bands as a
function of b. All of the energy eigenvalues for the model
with N¼9 lie within the Bloch bands, with the unit-width
ISW states lying exactly on the lower (for b>0) or upper
(forb<0) boundary of the positive-energy bands.
The properties of the energy eigenfunctions for this model
are presented in the supplementary material.
26
V. EXPLORING DEFECTS
In Sec. IV B, we examined the effects of changing the
strength of allof the delta wells in our model. Now we will
investigate what happens if we change the parameters ofonly a single delta well while leaving all others unchanged.If we change one of the delta wells without making corre-
sponding changes to the other wells, we disrupt the periodic-
ity of the system. Such a disruption of periodicity is knownas adefect .
Our simple one-dimensional model admits point defects
but not line or surface defects, which can only exist in higher
dimensions. We investigate two types of point defects in our
model system: strength defects and position defects. Astrength defect is one in which the strength b
iof one of the
delta wells differs from the strength of the other wells. These
strength defects are similar to impurity defects in real crys-
tals, in which one of the atoms in the crystal is replaced witha different type of atom. If the strength of the defect well isset to zero, then the strength defect can also be used to model Fig. 4. Lowest 40 energy eigenvalues ( en) as a function of bwith N¼9
evenly spaced delta wells. The solid (red) curves are the boundaries of the
Bloch bands.
98 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 T. K. Timberlake and N. Woodfield 98 04 October 2023 23:01:27
a vacancy in which one of the lattice sites in the crystal is
unoccupied. A position defect is one in which the position bi
of one of the delta wells deviates from the even spacing
maintained by the other wells. The position defects are com-parable to Frenkel defects in real crystals, in which one of
the atoms in the crystal is displaced from its normal location.
We investigate how both types of defect alter the energyspectrum and the structure of the eigenfunctions in this
system.
A. Strength defects
To investigate a strength defect, we leave the delta wells
at their usual positions and give each one a scaled strength b
¼10, except that we modify the strength of the seventh well
(located at q¼7).
38Figure 5shows the energy eigenvalues
as a function of the defect well strength b7. The Bloch bands
for the inﬁnitely periodic system with b¼10 are shown in
Fig.5for reference.
Examination of Fig. 5shows that the strength defect alters
the eigenvalue spectrum. Some eigenvalues change very lit-
tle as b7is varied, but others change considerably. The gen-
eral pattern is that as b7is decreased from 10, the highest
level in a particular band (including the negative energy
band) moves into the band gap and eventually approachesthe ISW level at the bottom of the next higher band for large
negative values of b7. The remaining eigenvalues may
change slightly but stay within the Bloch bands. Note thatforb
7¼0, which corresponds to a vacancy at the seventh
lattice site, the top level of each band shown has moved intothe gap between Bloch bands, with larger movements forlower energy bands.
The movement of an energy level into and through a band
gap is closely related to what happens when semiconductorcrystals are doped by the introduction of impurities into thecrystal lattice. The introduction of dopant atoms into thecrystal generates a defect in the doped crystal structure andcan lead to energy levels that appear within the band gap ofthe pure semiconductor crystal. If the dopant is an electrondonor, then the energy level in the gap will be close to the(higher energy) conduction band and the material is known
as an n-type semiconductor. If the dopant is an electron
acceptor, the energy level in the gap will be close to the(lower energy) valence band and the material is known as ap-type semiconductor. Many semiconductors devices involvejunctions between p-type and n-type materials. In our simplemodel, we can see that changing the value of b
7can trans-
form our system from a having a spectrum like that of ap-type material to having a spectrum like that of an n-typematerial.
If instead b
7is increased from 10, the highest level in each
positive energy band moves downward while the bottomstate of each band is the ISW state that is not affected bychanges to b
7. Thus, as b7increases, the size of each band
gradually decreases and the band gaps increase in size. Thelowest of the negative energy states moves downward,approximately following the curve e¼/C0b
2
7=4, which is the
energy of the bound state for an isolated delta well withscaled strength b
7. The other negative energy states remain
within the original Bloch band. As b7!61, the system
becomes divided into two separate versions of our ﬁnite peri-odic model, one with N¼6 and the other with N¼2. The
energy spectrum as b
7!61is, therefore, a mixture of
the energy levels for these two cases, although note that theeigenvalue for b
7!/C0 1 isnotadiabatically connected to
the same eigenvalue for b7!1 .
Figure 6shows a detail from Fig. 5to illustrate the behav-
ior of the negative energy levels near b7¼10. The ﬁgure
shows that the lowest eight energy eigenvalue curves areroughly horizontal for b
7<9:9 with values approximately
equal to a mixture of the N¼2 and N¼6 results in Fig. 3.
Asb7increases, these curves are approached from above by
then¼9 curve and undergo a series of avoided crossings
that push most of the states toward slightly lower energies.
Forb7>10:1, the n¼1 curve slopes steeply downward
while the curves for n¼2 to 9 are nearly horizontal again. In
effect, the n¼9 curve transfers its behavior to the n¼1
curve while the other curves simply swap places.
The behavior shown for a strength defect at the seventh
well is typical. Introducing a strength defect at a differentwell location produces qualitatively similar results, unlessthe defect is placed at the center of the ISW at q¼5. In that
case, odd-symmetry states, which have a node at the defect,will be unaffected by the defect, while even-symmetrystates will have alterations in both their eigenvalues andeigenfunctions.
The effects of a strength defect on the energy eigenfunc-
tions in this system are discussed in the supplementarymaterial.
26Fig. 5. Lowest 40 energy eigenvalues ( en) for N¼9 evenly spaced delta
wells with b¼10 except for a strength defect in the seventh well.
Eigenvalues are shown as a function of the defect strength ( b7). The solid
(red) lines are the boundaries of the Bloch bands.
99 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 T. K. Timberlake and N. Woodfield 99 04 October 2023 23:01:27
B. Position defects
To investigate a position defect, we give all of the delta
wells a common strength b¼10 and space the wells evenly,
except that the well at q¼7 will be moved to q¼b7. Figure
7shows the energy eigenvalues as a function of b7. The
Bloch bands for the inﬁnitely periodic system with b¼10
are shown in Fig. 7for reference. Note that the plot covers a
domain 5 <b7<9 in order to illustrate what happens if the
defect well is displaced beyond one of its neighboring wells.
Figure 7shows that, like the strength defect examined pre-
viously, the position defect can alter the energy spectrum ofthe system, but the character of the alteration is different
from the case of the strength defect. The position defect gen-
erally causes the positive energy levels to oscillate as b
7is
varied. All positive energy levels are thus affected, even theISW levels, because no eigenfunction can have a node at allpossible locations of the defect well. The amplitude of eachlevel’s oscillation is relatively constant in the range6<b
7<8, but as the defect moves past the neighboring
well the amplitude of the oscillation may change noticeably.The oscillation of the levels mostly produces a modulation
of the size of the energy bands; however, for the lowest posi-
tive energy band the top level shifts into the gap above thisband and the bottom levels shifts into the gap below thisband as the defect moves past the neighboring well. Forsome values of b
7, the lowest positive energy level ( n¼10)
is pushed back upward into the lowest energy band after anavoided crossing with the n¼9 level that has shifted upward
to become positive, but the n¼9 level essentially takes the
place of the n¼10 level in the gap below the ﬁrst positive
energy band. We do not see any level move all the way
across a band gap as was the case for a strength defect.
The negative energy levels are clustered near e¼/C025
when b
7/C257. As the defect well moves closer to one of its
neighboring wells, the n¼1 level moves toward lower ener-
gies while the n¼9 level moves upward, becoming positive
when the defect is very close to the neighboring well and thetwo wells begin to merge into a single well with a doubledstrength. When the defect well lies at the location of a neigh-boring well, we see eight negative energy levels: seven clus-
tered near the usual value of e¼/C025 and one with
e/C25/C0100 (the bound state energy for a single delta well
with b¼20). The merger of the two wells reduces the total
number of wells and thus the number of negative-energystates, but since the merged well has twice the strength of theother wells, one of the negative-energy states has a muchlower energy than the others. As the defect moves past theneighboring well, the n¼1 and n¼9 levels move back
toward e¼/C025, approaching closest when the defect well is
midway between two other wells (e.g., at b
7¼5:5 or 8.5).
However, these levels never return to the compact clusternear e¼/C025 and as the defect approaches the next well
(b
7/C255 or 9), these levels move back to the values they had
forb7/C256o r8 .
Figure 8shows a detail from Fig. 7to illustrate the behav-
ior of the cluster of negative energy states near e¼/C025. The
eigenvalue curves display a series of avoided crossings near
b7¼5:5, 7, and 8.5 when the n¼1 and n¼9 levels
approach the cluster. The n¼1 and n¼9 levels are visible
in the ﬁgure for b7/C257. The avoided crossings produce a
noticeable shift in the levels, but away from these avoidedcrossings the levels in this cluster remain approximately con-stant as b
7is varied.
The behavior shown for a position defect at the seventh
well is typical. Introducing a position defect at a differentwell location produces qualitatively similar results, with twoexceptions. If the defect is introduced at the ﬁfth well, whichis usually at the center of the ISW, then the plot of energyeigenvalues versus b
5is perfectly symmetric about b5¼5.
The other exception is if the defect well approaches one ofthe walls of the ISW. In this case, as the defect wellapproaches the location of the wall, the n¼1 state willFig. 6. Detail of Fig. 5showing the negative energy eigenvalues ( en)a sa
function of b7. The solid (red) lines are the boundaries of the Bloch bands.
Fig. 7. Lowest 40 energy eigenvalues ( en) for N¼9 delta wells with b¼10
and evenly spaced except for a position defect in the seventh well.
Eigenvalues are shown as a function of the defect position ( b7). The solid
(red) lines are the boundaries of the Bloch bands.
100 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 T. K. Timberlake and N. Woodfield 100 04 October 2023 23:01:27
maintain an energy near e¼/C025 rather than dropping to
lower energies as in the case examined above, but the energyof the n¼9 state will still become positive. Although an iso-
lated delta well always supports a negative-energy state, a
delta well near a boundary may not support a negative-energy state. As the delta well reaches the boundary, it effec-
tively disappears from the system. The system will then have
only eight delta wells all of the same strength, so it will sup-port eight negative energy states all with similar energies,
much like the case of the strength defect with b
7¼0.
The effects of a position defect on the energy eigenfunc-
tions in this system are discussed in the supplementarymaterial.
26
VI. CONCLUSION
We have shown that a simple system consisting of an inﬁ-
nite square well containing Nperiodically spaced delta wells
exhibits the formation of band structure in the energy spec-
trum. The energy eigenvalues for this system can be easily
computed, and the energy spectrum shows level splittingwith the formation of well-deﬁned energy bands separated
by band gaps as Nis increased. In addition, we have investi-
gated two types of defects in this system: strength defectsand position defects. Strength defects, in which the strength
of one of the delta wells is altered, can lead to energy levels
moving out of the usual energy bands and into or even acrossthe band gaps. On the other hand, position defects, in whichthe position of one of the delta wells is altered, produce a
modulation in the size of the energy bands and gaps and, if
the defect well moves past one of its neighboring wells, canresult in some levels moving into a gap region.
The investigation of this model requires only standard
techniques usually learned in introductory quantum mechan-
ics: ﬁnding the general form of the energy eigenfunctionsand then using the boundary conditions to determine the
allowed energy eigenvalues. Moreover, the computation of
the eigenvalues requires nothing more difﬁcult than thenumerical solution of a transcendental equation. Thus, this
simple model can provide an effective introduction to impor-
tant concepts related to periodic quantum systems and canhelp to bridge the gap between basic quantum mechanics
and more abstract approaches like Bloch’s theorem.
Furthermore, this model allows for the direct investigation ofdefects and can be used to illustrate how impurities and dis-
locations can alter the energy spectrum of a periodic quan-
tum system.The computations required to investigate this system are
relatively easy to perform. Code notebooks for all of thecomputations shown, using the open-source Maxima com-
puter algebra system, are available in the supplementarymaterial.
26We encourage readers to obtain the code and
explore this simple model themselves. Although we havetried to provide a general overview of the behavior of thismodel, there are many more behaviors that can be explored.For example, one could investigate the role of the delta wellstrength ( b) in determining the results of a position defect,
explore defects in which both the position and strength ofone of the delta wells are changed, or use alternating valuesofbto simulate a diatomic crystal like NaCl. In addition,
this quantum model is analogous to a simple acoustical sys-tem of a pipe with closed ends and divided into segments bybafﬂes or washers. Experimental investigations of this acous-
tical system have shown the formation of band structure,
2,3
but our quantum model could be used to guide the explora-
tion of defects in these acoustical systems.39
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Shawn Hilbert, Scott
Carr, and Zachary Lindsey for helpful discussions of thismaterial, as well as the anonymous referees for their helpfulfeedback. In addition, they would like to thank Kelli Little,Paolo Francisco, and Tadan Cobb for similar work thatinspired this study. This work was partly funded by theBerry College LifeWorks Program.
a)Electronic mail: ttimberlake@berry.edu
1Robert Eisberg and Robert Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms,
Molecules, Solids, Nuclei, and Particles , 2nd ed. (Wiley, New York,
1985), pp. 445–450.
2Christopher Carr and Roger Yu, “Sonic band structure and localized
modes in a density-modulated system: Experiment and theory,” Am. J.
Phys. 70, 1154–1156 (2002).
3Marissa D’Onofrio, Mitchell Crum, Shawn A. Hilbert, Herman Batelaan,
Timothy Canalichio, and Tyler Bull, “An acoustic analog for a quantum
mechanical level-splitting route to band formation,” Am. J. Phys. 84,
841–847 (2016).
4Parker Roberts, Alexandria Skinner, Tadan Cobb, Scott Carr, and Shawn
A. Hilbert, “A classical analogy for quantum band formation,” Am. J.
Phys. 86, 609–615 (2018).
5David J. Grifﬁths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics , 2nd ed. (Pearson,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2005), pp. 224–229.
6Neil Ashcroft and N. David Mermin, Solid State Physics (Holt, Reinhart
and Winston, New York, 1976), pp. 131–150.
7R. D. L. Kronig and William George Penney, “Quantum mechanics of elec-
trons in crystal lattices,” Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A 130, 499–513 (1931).
8A. A. Bahurmuz and P. D. Loly, “Model bandstructure calculations,” Am.
J. Phys. 49, 675–680 (1981).
9R. L. Pavelich and Frank Marsiglio, “The Kronig-Penney model extended
to arbitrary potentials via numerical matrix mechanics,” Am. J. Phys. 83,
773–781 (2015).
10David J. Grifﬁths and Carl A. Steinke, “Waves in locally periodic media,”
Am. J. Phys. 69, 137–154 (2001).
11Felipe Le Vot, Juan J. Mel /C19endez, and Santos B. Yuste, “Numerical matrix
method for quantum periodic potentials,” Am. J. Phys. 84, 426–433
(2016).
12Dae-Yup Song, “Energy splitting in a ﬁnite periodic multiple-wellpotential,” Eur. J. Phys. 38, 055401 (2017).
13D. W. L. Sprung, J. D. Sigetich, Hua Wu, and J. Martorell, “Bound states
of a ﬁnite periodic potential,” Am. J. Phys. 68, 715–722 (2000).
14David Kiang, “Multiple scattering by a Dirac comb,” Am. J. Phys. 42,
785–787 (1974).
15Hai-Woong Lee, Adam Zysnarski, and Phillip Kerr, “One-dimensionalscattering by a locally periodic potential,” Am. J. Phys. 57, 729–734
(1989).Fig. 8. Detail of Fig. 7showing the negative energy eigenvalues ( en)a sa
function of b7. The solid (red) lines are the boundaries of the Bloch bands.
101 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 T. K. Timberlake and N. Woodfield 101 04 October 2023 23:01:27
16David J. Grifﬁths and Nicholas F. Taussig, “Scattering from a locally peri-
odic potential,” Am. J. Phys. 60, 883–888 (1992).
17D. W. L. Sprung, Hua Wu, and J. Martorell, “Scattering by a ﬁnite peri-
odic potential,” Am. J. Phys. 61, 1118–1124 (1993).
18Raina J. Olsen and Giovanni Vignale, “The quantum mechanics of electric
conduction in crystals,” Am. J. Phys. 78, 954–960 (2010).
19Braulio Guti /C19errez-Medina, “Wave transmission through periodic, quasipe-
riodic, and random one-dimensional ﬁnite lattices,” Am. J. Phys. 81,
104–111 (2013).
20P. R. Berman, “Transmission resonances and Bloch states for a periodicarray of delta function potentials,” Am. J. Phys. 81, 190–201 (2013).
21I. D. Johnston and D. Segal, “Electrons in a crystal lattice: A simple com-
puter model,” Am. J. Phys. 60, 600–607 (1992).
22Robert Gilmore, Elementary Quantum Mechanics in One Dimension (The
Johns Hopkins U.P., Baltimore, MD, 2004), pp. 167–211.
23Mario Belloni and R. W. Robinett, “The inﬁnite well and Dirac delta func-tion potentials as pedagogical, mathematical and physical models in quan-
tum mechanics,” Phys. Rep. 540, 25–122 (2014).
24Ernesto Cota, Jorge Flores, and Guillermo Monsivais, “A simple way to
understand the origin of the electron band structure,” Am. J. Phys. 56,
366–372 (1988).
25David C. Johnston, “Attractive Kronig-Penney band structures and wavefunctions,” e-print arXiv:1905.12084v2 (2019).
26See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/10.0006391 for a discussion of the energy eigenfunctions associ-
ated with the models investigated in the paper as well as Maxima com-
puter algebra system ﬁles for carrying out all of the computations
described in the paper.
27See Ref. 5, pp. 70–73.28See Ref. 22, pp. 15–18.
29M. Belloni, M. A. Doncheski, and Richard Wallace Robinett, “Zero-
curvature solutions of the one-dimensional Schr €odinger equation,” Phys.
Scr.72, 122–126 (2005).
30L. P. Gilbert, M. Belloni, M. A. Doncheski, and Richard Wallace
Robinett, “Piecewise zero-curvature energy eigenfunctions in one
dimension,” Eur. J. Phys. 27, 1331–1339 (2006).
31L. P. Gilbert, M. Belloni, M. A. Doncheski, and Richard Wallace
Robinett, “Playing quantum physics jeopardy with zero-energy
eigenstates,” Am. J. Phys. 74, 1035–1036 (2006).
32Zafar Ahmed and Swayam Kesari, “The simplest model of the zero-
curvature eigenstate,” Eur. J. Phys. 35, 018002 (2013).
33Urbano Oseguera, “Effect of inﬁnite discontinuities on the motion of a par-
ticle in one dimension,” Eur. J. Phys. 11, 35–38 (1990).
34A. Ibrahim and F. Marsiglio, “Double well potentials with a quantum moat
barrier or a quantum well barrier give rise to similar entangled wave
functions,” Am. J. Phys. 86, 180–185 (2018).
35See Ref. 5, p. 73.
36However, a given ISW eigenvalue does not correspond to the same eigen-
state for different values of N. For example, the n¼1 state for N¼0 has
the same energy as the n¼3 state for N¼2.
37See Ref. 5, pp. 73–76.
38We chose to place the defect at well seven of nine primarily because it pro-
duces typical results, but we hope that some readers will also appreciate
the nod to Star Trek. After all, the defect well disrupts the periodicity sothat it is no longer assimilated into the collective.
39In fact, our study of this quantum model was inspired by a preliminarystudy of defects in an acoustical system conducted by Shawn Hilbert,
Scott Carr, and Raphael Paolo Francisco.
102 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 T. K. Timberlake and N. Woodfield 102 04 October 2023 23:01:27
