
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2022
Black-hole analog in vehicular traffic 
Luanna K. de Souza ; George E. A. Matsas  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 692–696 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0091957
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Kinetic theory of vehicular traf fic
Am. J. Phys.  (February 2016)
Vehicular camera pedestrian detection research
AIP Conference Proceedings  (March 2018)
Modeling vehicular speed fluctuations as a stochastic process with exponentially decaying memory
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2020) 04 October 2023 23:16:34
Black-hole analog in vehicular traffic
Luanna K. de Souzaa)and George E. A. Matsasb)
Instituto de F /C19ısica Te /C19orica, Universidade Estadual Paulista, Rua Dr. Bento Teobaldo Ferraz, 271, 01140-070,
S~ao Paulo, SP, Brazil
(Received 18 March 2022; accepted 24 July 2022)
We propose here a simple black-hole analog in vehicular-trafﬁc dynamics. The corresponding
causal diagram is determined by the propagation of the tail light ﬂashes emitted by a convoy of
cars on a highway. In addition to being a new black-hole analog, this illustrates how causaldiagrams, so common in general relativity, may be useful in areas as unexpected as vehicular-
trafﬁc dynamics.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0091957
I. INTRODUCTION
The area of analog models of gravitational systems has a
splendid history. Its genesis can be traced back to the begin-
ning of the 1980s with two independent papers: one byVincent Moncrief1and the other by Bill Unruh.2Moncrief
considered a perturbed ﬂuid in a general relativistic space-
time and concluded that one can study the stability of spheri-
cal accretion onto nonrotating stars by the methods used for
black holes , while Unruh2showed that the perturbation of
usual nonrelativistic irrotational ﬂuids develops sonic hori-
zons, which emit sound waves with a thermal spectrum anal-ogous to the radiation derived by Hawking for usual black
holes.3After that, various analog black holes were discov-
ered in Bose–Einstein condensates, shallow water waves,
slow light, and so on (see Refs. 4and5for reviews of analog
models of gravity). Our vehicular-trafﬁc black hole adds a
new and appealingly simple model to this list.
We propose a simple black-hole analog in vehicular-
trafﬁc dynamics. The corresponding causal diagram is deter-
mined by the propagation of the tail light ﬂashes emitted by
a convoy of cars on a straight highway. Similar to a realblack hole, our vehicular-trafﬁc black-hole model exhibits
event and apparent horizons and a Planck region where the
causal structure breaks down. This model also illustrates
how (informational) causal diagrams, so common in general
relativity, may be useful in areas as unexpected as vehicular-
trafﬁc dynamics. It is possible that this simple physical-
informational approach, complemented by more traditionalones,
6could help to avoid trafﬁc accidents under impaired
visibility conditions. If this occurs, it would constitute a quite
curious relativity spin-off.
This paper is organized as follows: In Sec. II, we present
our vehicular-trafﬁc model. In Sec. III, we present the
information-ﬂow metric associated with the propagation of
the brake-light signal in the simpliﬁed time-independent (sta-
tionary) regime. In Sec. IV, we show how the drivers’ reac-
tion time can give rise to a vehicular-trafﬁc black hole. In
Sec. V, we show that taking into account accidents on the
track drives us to the nonstationary regime. In Sec. VI,w e
work out the more realistic nonstationary regime. In Sec.
VII, we summarize our results and add some ﬁnal remarks.
II. THE VEHICULAR-TRAFFIC MODEL
Consider a caravan of equally spaced inertial cars initially
moving (to the left) with velocity vj¼const ;j¼1;2;…o n
a straight highway covered with Cartesian coordinates. The
vehicles are assumed to be smaller than any other distancescale in the problem. We also assume that the brake lights
can only be seen by adjacent vehicles and that, once the carahead brakes, the car behind should also brake after some
reaction time T>0.Twill vary depending on the weather
conditions. The more fog is present, the larger Twill be. We
are interested in following the propagation of the tail light
ﬂashes along the highway when the brakes are applied in
succession (see Fig. 1).
We shall denote by r
jðtÞthe position of the j-th car at the
instant t. The propagation of the tail light ﬂashes can be rep-
resented by the sequence
fðt/C3
1;r/C3
1Þ;…;ðt/C3
j;r/C3
jÞ;…g; (1)
where ðt/C3
j;r/C3
jÞdenotes the instant t/C3
jand position r/C3
jwhen the
j-th vehicle starts to brake.
III. THE STATIONARY REGIME
Let us begin by assuming the braking is smooth and brief
enough such that vj¼v/C25const. Hence, the initial separa-
tion between contiguous vehicles jrjþ1ðtÞ/C0rjðtÞj /C17 D
remains (approximately) the same even after the brakes areapplied, avoiding shocks. In addition, we start with the
assumption that T¼TðrÞis simply a monotonic function of
the position where the driver receives the tail light signalfrom the car ahead. Later on, we will remove this restriction
and envisage the more realistic case where the visibility con-
ditions vary also in time T¼Tðt;rÞ.
We can think of the caravan as a sort of medium propagat-
ing with velocity von a preferred reference frame S, namely,
the highway. The speed of the information propagation with
respect to the vehicular medium is
c
s¼D=TðrÞ>0; (2)
where T/C241 s under normal visibility conditions.7,8Now, let
us note that, since all the velocity scales in the problem are
much smaller than the speed of light, we can assume
Newtonian physics all around in our calculations. Thus, weuse the usual nonrelativistic velocity composition to expressthe information-propagation velocity with respect to the
highway S
dr=dt¼7c
sþv;v00; (3)
where we will choose here þcsand v<0 in Eq. (6)in accor-
dance with Fig. 1. Note that we are only interested in the
692 Am. J. Phys. 90(9), September 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 692 04 October 2023 23:16:34
“outgoing” information ﬂow, i.e., from the j-th to the jþ1-th
car.
Now, we aim to describe the information ﬂow as propagat-
ing in a vehicular-trafﬁc effective spacetime. To deﬁne any
physical space or spacetime, we must know its metric.
Metrics allow us to measure distances between neighboring
points. For instance, the so-called “line element” associatedwith the metric of the usual Galilean space (of Newtonian
mechanics) is
dl
2¼dx2þdy2þdz2; (4)
where fx;y;zgare usual Cartesian coordinates, since the
squared spatial distance between any pair of neighboring
points is dl2. In the relativistic realm, neither space nor time
has an absolute meaning on its own right. Rather, only a
combination of both of them does. The type of combination
depends on the case. Far from matter, singularities and other
oddities, where inertial observers experience a homogeneous
and isotropic space, and the line element is the Minkowskione (of special relativity)
ds
2
M¼/C0c2dt2þdx2þdy2þdz2; (5)
where ft;x;y;zgare spacetime Cartesian coordinates. It is
important to notice that ds2
Mis not positive deﬁnite. In partic-
ular, light rays follow “null worldlines,” where neighboring
points satisfy ds2
M¼0.
Now, let us seek the spacetime where the information
propagation (3)follows null worldlines. The line element of
such a spacetime can be found by inspection
ds2
VT/C17/C0 ð c2
s/C0v2Þdt2/C02vdtdrþdr2: (6)
Indeed, Eq. (3)can be recovered from Eq. (6)by imposing
ds2
VT¼0. Thus, the propagation of the brake lights will be
seen as null worldlines in the vehicular-trafﬁc effective
spacetime deﬁned by the line element (6). Note that for
v¼0, Eq. (6)simply reads ds2
VT¼/C0c2
sdt2þdr2correspond-
ing to the Minkowski line element (with csplaying the role
of the speed of light) but for jvj6¼0, nontrivial effects maycome out because the right-moving information is dragged
by the “left-moving vehicular-trafﬁc spacetime.”
Let us examine the situation shown in Fig. 1and assume
the visibility conditions deteriorate to the west (decreasing r
coordinates). Thus, the smaller the rcoordinate the larger is
the reaction time T(r). Now, let us consider that, as we move
from far east to the west, there exists a point, r¼rH, where
T(r) is sufﬁciently large such that
D=TðrHÞ¼j vj: (7)
The coordinate r¼rHﬁxes the location of an effective
apparent horizon like that of a black hole: for r<rHorigi-
nally outgoing information lines will propagate “inwards”
with respect to the highway (although they will always prop-
agate “outwards” with respect to the convoy). This is sobecause the information propagates so slowly in comparison
to the cars motion that, by the time that car jþ1 reacts to the
signal, it has already passed the point where the car jemitted
the signal. This will preclude the tail light brake signals from
“properly” propagating through the convoy, thus causing
accidents.
In the stationary regime, where T¼TðrÞ(Tdoes not
depend on the coordinate t), the apparent horizon will coin-
cide with the event horizon , which is the black-hole frontier
from inside which no information escapes. In general relativ-ity, light rays emitted outwards at the event horizon of a
black hole get frozen there.
9
At this point, one should notice that the existence of a
vehicular-trafﬁc black hole will only depend on a rapidenough deterioration of the visibility conditions as r
decreases (see Fig. 1). In this case, the function D=TðrÞwill
decrease rapidly as rdecreases, leading D=TðrÞ!j vjat
some r¼r
H. Ideally, a realistic T(r) function would demand
that data will be experimentally collected on the ground, but
this is much beyond the scope of this work. Nevertheless,rather than choosing an arbitrary reaction time T(r) to create
a vehicular-trafﬁc horizon and explore its nontrivial conse-
quences, we show in Sec. IVhow T(r) can be chosen to
formally mimic the simplest black hole in nature: the
Schwarzschild black hole, which is completely characterized
by its mass M. Readers who are not interested in this connec-
tion should just employ the T(r) deﬁned in Eq. (11), refer to
Fig.2, and skip directly to Sec. V.
IV. THE VEHICULAR-TRAFFIC BLACK HOLE
Let us now relate Eq. (6)to the line element of a
(Schwarzschild) static vacuum black hole with mass M. The
line element of a Schwarzschild black hole (omitted the
angular part) can be cast in advanced Eddington–Finkelstein
(E-F) coordinates ð/C22t;rÞas
10,11
ds2
BH¼/C0C2f/C0d/C22t2þ2CðrH=rÞd/C22tdrþfþdr2;
f6ðrÞ¼16rH=r; (8)
where rH/C172GM=C2is the event-horizon radius, and we
replaced the speed of light cby a convenient analogue speed
C¼200 km =h. The similarity between Eqs. (6)and(8)is
unambiguous, but there is a relevant difference: While the
latter is already all determined, the former depends on csðrÞ,
which varies according to the visibility conditions. Here, we
Fig. 1. (Color online) Convoy of vehicles, each separated by a distance D,
each moving with the same constant velocity v, on a one-dimensional road.
The stars at the rear-lamp denote the ﬁrst-ﬂash due to braking, which occurs
at the spacetime coordinates ðt/C3
j;r/C3
jÞ; the stars at the windshield denote the
instantaneous arrival of the light ray at the next vehicle; and the lines joining
the rear lamps describe the propagation of the braking information. Once the
rear lamp of the j-th vehicle is applied, the next one, jþ1-th, will take a
time-lapse Tðrjþ1Þto react. The more impaired the visibility conditions, the
longer the reaction time. It is assumed that such information propagates as achain from one vehicle to the next on the right. (For the sake of later com-
parison with our black-hole spacetime diagram, the convoy is shown to
move in the negative rdirection.)
693 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 L. K. de Souza and G. E. A. Matsas 693 04 October 2023 23:16:34
will select T(r) that yields a “Schwarzschild” analog
vehicular-trafﬁc black hole.
The outgoing radial null worldlines, ds2¼0, for
Schwarzschild black holes in E-F coordinates satisfy
dr=d/C22t¼Cðr/C0rHÞ=ðrþrHÞ: (9)
Integrating this, we obtain the corresponding wordlines
C/C22t¼rþ2rHlnr
rH/C01/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12þconst : (10)
Now, comparing Eqs. (3)and(9), we choose T(r) such that
the right-hand sides of both of these equations are formally
equal for
r>r
P/C17rHð1/C0jvj=CÞ=ð1þjvj=CÞ:
Then,
TðrÞ¼ð D=CÞðr/C0rHÞ=ðrþrHÞþj vj=C ½/C138/C01;r>rP;
(11)
and the reaction time T(r) is assumed to be arbitrary large in
the interval 0 /C20r/C20rP. Note that TðrÞ!1 asr!rH.I ti s
important to keep in mind that our information-ﬂow analysiswill be restricted to the domain r/C210, although the highway
is assumed to be unbounded, r2ð /C0 1 ;þ1Þ .
Given the ﬁrst-car brake application, ðt/C3
1;r/C3
1Þ, Eq. (11)
determines the complete worldline (1)through
t/C3
j¼t/C3
j/C01þTr jðt/C3
j/C01Þ/C2/C3;r/C3
j¼rjðt/C3
1Þ/C0j vjðt/C3
j/C0t/C3
1Þ;(12)
where rjðt/C3
1Þ¼r/C3
1þðj/C01ÞD.
In Fig. 2, we superimpose the smooth gray lines of the
black-hole radial outgoing null worldlines in ð/C22t;rÞcoordi-
nates (10) (with const ¼Ct/C3
1/C0r/C3
1/C02rHlnjr/C3
1=rH/C01j)o n
the dotted lines of our brake-light lines in the usual ( t,r)
Cartesian coordinates (12). The reason why the continuous
but nonsmooth dotted lines of the brake lights overlap so
well with the smooth gray lines of the black-hole outgoing
worldlines is because we are dwelling in the small- Dregime:
D=cs/C1jdcs=drj/C281. (This is in agreement with our assump-
tion that the caravan should be seen as a sort of “vehicular
medium.”) The vertical broken line at r¼rHcorresponds to
the black-hole horizon, which means that the visibility con-ditions at r
P<r<rHslow down drivers’ reactions enough
to make outgoing information lines propagate “inwards”
with respect to the highway. The gray region, 0 /C20r/C20rP,
was excised from our information-ﬂow graph since T(r)
diverges at r¼rP: vehicles that get the front-car brake signal
at 0/C20r/C20rPdo not react ever. In general, the brake-light
line will terminate somewhere in r<rPdue to cars that
receive the front-car tail light ﬂash at r/H11407rP, braking at
r<rP, eventually. In analogy to relativity, the region
0/C20r/C20rPwill play the role of an information Planck
region, where the theory will be assumed to break down. It iscommonly assumed that black hole singularities are mathe-
matical artifacts stemming from the fact that general relativ-
ity does not comply with quantum rules. Whether or not thisis the case, we do not know. Nevertheless, it is fair to say
that we shall not trust the causal structure predicted by gen-
eral relativity close enough to such extreme regions as given
by the Planck scaleﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
G/C22h=c
3p
/C2410/C033cm.12
We must emphasize that despite all the similarities
between Eqs. (6)and(8), they only concern the propagation
of information. The vehicle worldlines are not bound to any
light cones shown in Fig. 2. In the stationary regime in which
we are dwelling so far, vj¼v¼const and nothing would
stop the vehicles from crossing the r¼0 axis. However, the
appearance of singularities due to collisions begs us to go
beyond the stationary regime, changing this state of affairs.
V. VEHICULAR-TRAFFIC SINGULARITY
Let us now assume that the application of the brakes
decelerates the vehicle at a constant rate a, during the time
interval
Dt¼jvj/C0j vrj
a; (13)
until it reaches some reduced safe speed jvrj, after which it
proceeds with vr¼const. (Recall that in our case v;vr<0
and so a>0.) Figure 3depicts a situation where both cars, j
andjþ1, apply the brakes, attain a reduced velocity vr, and
move on without colliding with each other. A direct compar-ison with Fig. 2indicates this happens outside the hole ,
r>r
H, since outgoing information ﬂows outwards. In con-
trast, the snapshot in Fig. 4happens inside the hole at
Fig. 2. (Color online) The solid gray lines represent ingoing and outgoing
null worldlines associated with the light cones of the Schwarzschild black
hole. The dotted curves represent the propagation of the outgoing brake-light signals. Each dot represents the brake lights of ten cars. Distinct lines
are associated with different ﬁrst-braking events: ðt
/C3
1;r/C3
1Þ. The outgoing
black-hole and brake-light lines are nearly aligned. The vertical dashed line
atr¼rHmarks the black-hole frontier. The outgoing information lines prop-
agate inwards for rP<r<rH. The area 0 /C20r/C20rPplays the role of an
effective information Planck region, where T(r) diverges and the causal
structure collapses. Here, D¼0:1k m ;v¼80 km =h, and rH¼20 km.
694 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 L. K. de Souza and G. E. A. Matsas 694 04 October 2023 23:16:34
rP<r<rH, since outgoing information ﬂows inwards.
Depending on the physical situation, the cars still may notcollide, but generally they will. There are different possibili-ties the jþ1-th car behind hits the j-th car ahead depending
on whether or not the front car secures v
rand the back car
starts braking. In Fig. 4, the j-th car reacts fast enough to
begin braking but not to avoid a collision with the j/C01-th
car, which attained the speed vr.
The ﬁrst collision of a vehicular pileup will be interpreted
as the appearance of a singularity since the rest of the convoywill collide in succession at the same spot. The fact that the
singularity forms at some given time, rather than having
existed forever, demands we abandon our initial stationarity
assumption. Hence, let us move on and consider the physicalsituation where T¼Tðt;rÞ.
VI. NONSTATIONARY REGIME
Let us suppose that the visibility conditions evolve contin-
uously from clear weather at t<t
ito foggy weather at
t>tf. Recalling that our information-ﬂow analysis is
restricted to the domain r/C210, let us write the reaction time
outside the Planck region, where drivers take a ﬁnite time to
react as
Tðt;rÞ¼D
C/C21þjvj
C/C20/C21/C01
ðt<tiÞ
1/C02rH
rþrHt/C0ti
tf/C0tiþjvj
C"#/C01
ðti/C20t/C20tfÞ;
r/C0rH
rþrHþjvj
C/C20/C21/C01
ðt>tfÞ8
>>>>>>>>>>>><
>>>>>>>>>>>>:
(14)
while T(t,r) is assumed to be arbitrary large inside the
Planck region. As before, the boundary of the Planck region
is deﬁned by the line where T(t,r) diverges (see Fig. 5). Note
that
Tðt;rÞ¼const <1;for t<t
i;
while T(t,r) reproduces Eq. (11) fort>tf. In the region
ti/C20t/C20tf, the T(t,r) function is designed to connect contin-
uously the previous asymptotic regions.
In Fig. 5, we exhibit the information ﬂow diagram for
the nonstationary case. The propagation of the brake-lightsignals is depicted accordingly by dotted lines. For t<t
i,
the information ﬂow is described by homogeneously dis-
tributed straight dotted lines, corresponding to an effective
Minkowski spacetime. However, as the weather conditionsdeteriorate, starting at t¼t
i, the drivers react slower and an
event horizon appears (see arrow), growing up to r¼rHat
t¼tf. The information propagation lines coincide with the
ones shown in Fig. 2fort>tf. Inside the event horizon,
the information lines cannot go far away, in contrast to the
ones outside the event horizon. The event horizon contains
the apparent horizon, which emerges at tAH¼ðtiþtfÞ=2
and increases until it merges with the event horizon att¼t
f. Inside the apparent horizon, outgoing information
ﬂows inwards. The boundary of the Planck region is
denoted by the internal dashed line, which equals r¼rPin
the stationary region, t>tf. The spots where the vehicles
pile up lie inside the Planck region (or beyond: r<0) in
Fig.5.
VII. SUMMARY AND FINAL REMARKS
In summary, let us assume a convoy of vehicles moving to
the left, as in Fig. 1, and the ﬁrst vehicle begins to brake at
r¼0 before the formation of the event horizon (below the
arrow in Fig. 5). In this case, all the following cars have time
Fig. 3. (Color online) Here, vehicles jand jþ1 brake and decelerate, as
shown by the blue dotted-dashed lines. Eventually, they re-establish uniform
motion without collision. The red dashed line represents the information
ﬂow world line, and the green horizontal dashed line represents the instanta-
neous propagation of the brake light signal between adjacent cars. (Recall
that all the action takes place in the usual Galileo spacetime.)
Fig. 4. (Color online) Vehicles jandjþ1 brake, decelerate, and eventually
collide (stary red blob), forming a vehicular-trafﬁc singularity. The fact that
information associated with outgoing worldlines ﬂows inwards (see red
dashed segments) testiﬁes that the situation occurs inside the vehicular-
trafﬁc black hole. The green horizontal dashed line represents the instanta-
neous propagation of the brake light signal between adjacent cars. (Recall
that all the action takes place in the usual Galileo spacetime.)
695 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 L. K. de Souza and G. E. A. Matsas 695 04 October 2023 23:16:34
to react properly, secure the reduced speed jvrj, and pass
safely through the foggy region. On the other hand, if the
ﬁrst vehicle applies the brakes after the formation of the
event horizon (above the arrow), the future development willbe entirely different. The outgoing information may still
ﬂow outwards for awhile depending on whether the brakesare applied before the formation of the apparent horizon, but,
eventually, will ﬂow inwards as it enters the apparent hori-zon, leading to accidents. The ﬁrst condemned car of theconvoy is represented by the small disk, which will berammed by the one behind it. Some other pairwise shocks
will occur on the track further but the vehicle responsible for
the massive accident will be the one that receives the brakesignal from the car ahead (large disk) inside the Planckregion. Inside this region, the visibility conditions are soimpaired the driver does not react to the brake signal, ram-ming the car straight ahead (see the target mark in Fig. 5).
This is the spot where the rest of the convoy will inadver-tently pile up.
As a result, accidents could be avoided if the drivers were
warned to diminish the velocity before entering the event
horizon. For this purpose, templates of risky areas should beprepared in advance to forecast where the event horizonwould be formed as the visibility conditions deteriorate.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
L.K.S. and G.E.A.M. were fully and partially supported by
the S ~ao Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP) under Grant No.
2019/18616-4 and Conselho Nacional de DesenvolvimentoCient /C19ıﬁco e Tecnol /C19ogico (CNPq) under Grant No. 301544/
2018-2.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)Electronic mail: luanna.souza@unesp.br
b)Electronic mail: george.matsas@unesp.br, ORCID: 0000-0002-6980-
9313.
1V. Moncrief, “Stability of stationary, spherical accretion onto aSchwarzschild black hole,” Astrophys. J. 235, 1038–1046 (1980).
2W. G. Unruh, “Experimental black hole evaporation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 46,
1351–1353 (1981).
3S. W. Hawking, “Black hole explosions?,” Nature (London) 248, 30–31
(1974); “Particle creation by black holes,” Commun. Math. Phys. 43,
199–220 (1975).
4M. Visser, “Acoustic black holes: Horizons, ergospheres, and Hawkingradiation,” Class. Quantum Grav. 15, 1767–1791 (1998).
5C. Barcel /C19o, S. Liberati, and M. Visser, “Analogue gravity,” Living Rev.
Relativity 14, 3 (2011).
6M. L. L. Iannini and R. Dickman, “Kinetic theory of vehicular trafﬁc,”
Am. J. Phys. 84, 135–145 (2016).
7G. Johansson and K. Rumar, “Drivers’ brake reaction times,” Human
Factors 13, 23–27 (1971).
8D. Helbing, “Trafﬁc and related self-driven many-particle systems,” Rev.
Mod. Phys. 73, 1067–1141 (2001).
9R. M. Wald, General Relativity (University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
1984).
10A. S. Eddington, “A comparison of Whitehead’s and Einstein’s formulae,”Nature 113, 192 (1924).
11D. Finkelstein, “Past-future asymmetry of the gravitational ﬁeld of a point
particle,” Phys. Rev. 110, 965–967 (1958).
12R. J. Adler, “Six easy roads to the Planck scale,” Am. J. Phys 78, 925–932
(2010).
Fig. 5. (Color online) Diagram depicting the propagation of the brake-light
signal (dotted lines) assuming deterioration of the visual conditions in the
period ( ti,tf). Each dot represents the brake lights of ten cars. The arrow indi-
cates the rise of the event horizon, which grows up to r¼rH.T h ea p p a r e n t
horizon emerges at t¼ðtiþtfÞ=2 and increases up to merging with the event
horizon at t¼tf. Inside the apparent horizon, outgoing information lines ﬂow
inwards, breeding vehicular-pileup events. The brake lights of the ﬁrst con-
demned vehicle are represented by small disks. The exhibited pileups occur in
the effective Planck region (or beyond: r<0). This plot assumes the parame-
ters of Fig. 2complemented by jvrj¼40 km =ha n d a¼240 km =h2.
696 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 L. K. de Souza and G. E. A. Matsas 696 04 October 2023 23:16:34
