
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkBOOK REVIEWS| FEBRUARY 01 2022
Book review—Beyond Global W arming: How Numerical
Models Revealed the Secrets of Climate Change 
Book review—Beyond Global W arming: How Numerical Models Revealed the Secrets of Climate Change . .
Syukuro  Manabe  and Anthony J.  Broccoli  208 pp.  Princeton U. P ., Princeton, NJ , 2020. Price: $35 (hardcover). ISBN 978-0-691-
18516-3. (John C. H. Chiang, Reviewer .)
Am. J. Phys.  90, 159–160 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0084647
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Modeling the future of Earth’ s climate
Physics T oday  (September 2020)
Perspectives on the importance of complex systems in understanding our climate and climate change—
The Nobel Prize in Physics 2021
Chaos  (May 2022)
Climate modeling innovators are honored with half the physics Nobel
Physics T oday  (December 2021) 04 October 2023 23:02:48
BOOK REVIEWS
The downloaded PDF for any Review in this section contains all the Reviews in this section.
Craig F. Bohren, Editor
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802; mailing address: P.O. Box 887, Boalsburg, PA 16827; bohren@meteo.psu.edu
Book review—Beyond Global Warming: How Numerical
Models Revealed the Secrets of Climate Change.Syukuro Manabe and and Anthony J. Broccoli. 208 pp.
Princeton U. P., Princeton, NJ, 2020. Price: $35
(hardcover). ISBN 978-0-691-18516-3. (John C. H.Chiang, Reviewer.)
For climate science, the year 2021 stands out for two rea-
sons. The ﬁrst is the publication of the Working Group I con-tribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
6th assessment report, announced with international fanfare,
which renews the public’s engagement with science ofglobal warming. The second is the awarding of the Nobel
Prize for Physics to two physical climate scientists, Syukoro
Manabe and Klaus Hasselmann. Manabe’s Nobel citationhighlights his role in “the physical modelling of Earth’s cli-
mate, quantifying variability, and reliably predicting global
warming.” As luck would have it, Manabe’s book is on pre-cisely this subject. Written with his longtime collaborator
Anthony Broccoli—a distinguished climate scientist in his
own right—the authors describe the role of numerical model-ing in the development of the science of global warming,highlighting contributions for which Manabe played a piv-
otal role. The book, thus, provides a valuable account of the
scientiﬁc work that ultimately led to Manabe’s honor.
The title Beyond Global Warming speaks to the authors’
belief that the greatest beneﬁt of climate modeling is not
about predicting future climate, but rather providing a deeperinsight into the mechanisms of global climate and how it
responds to forcing. Indeed, the book is mostly devoted to
communicating key physical concepts gleaned from climatemodel studies. (The book is based on lecture notes for a
graduate course that Manabe taught at Princeton.) However,
the authors also take a historical approach in linking the ear-liest studies of the late 19th and early 20th century to their
own efforts and those of their colleagues in the second half
of the 20th century, thus bridging the history that led to thecurrent Earth System models used today. As such, the book
occupies a space between standard climate dynamics texts
that introduce the science but without the historical contextand popular accounts of global warming science (e.g.,
Spencer Weart’s The Discovery of Global Warming ) that
delve into the history but with a relatively light treatment ofthe underlying physical concepts.
Chapter 1 begins with a textbook rendition of the green-
house effect. However, this chapter sets the stage for thedetailed look at the development of climate modeling and its
applications that occupies the rest of the book. Chapter 2
recounts the earliest works by Arrhenius and Callendar usingsimple energy-balance models to estimate the warming due
to increased greenhouse gases. A key lesson learned from
this early model was that vertical atmospheric processes areimportant, thus leading to the seminal 1D model studies
(Chapter 3) by Manabe and colleagues on radiative andradiative-convective equilibrium and response to CO
2forc-
ing. The success of the 1D models encouraged the develop-
ment of 3D general circulation models (Chapter 4) of the
atmosphere, thereby enabling the ﬁrst numerical simulations
exploring global climate changes (Chapter 5). Chapter 6 is
devoted to an exploration of climate sensitivity—that is, the
global mean surface temperature change due to a doubling ofatmospheric CO
2concentration—and various feedbacks that
determine this quantity. The reader is then transported to a
climate of the distant past with the ﬁrst attempts at modeling
of the most recent ice age (Chapter 7) and a comparison of
these simulations to paleoclimate proxy estimates of ocean
surface temperature. Chapter 8 is devoted to the develop-
ment of the global ocean model and its coupling to the atmo-spheric model to obtain a self-consistent model of the
atmosphere-land-ocean system, exploring how the deep
ocean (as part of the global climate system) then responds to
atmospheric CO
2changes (Chapter 9). The book closes with
a discussion of how the global water cycle changes in the
face of global warming (Chapter 10).
The book caters to a wider audience by being light on
equations, choosing instead to describe physical insights
through detailed descriptions aided by diagrams. The authors
walk the reader through various concepts, conveying the sub-
tlety and richness of the underlying physics. As such, having
a college physics background, or at least a very good physi-cal intuition, is needed to appreciate the contents. However,
minimizing the mathematics shouldn’t be confused with
minimizing the depth of coverage: For those wanting to sim-
mer in the details, this is a wonderful reference. Some atmo-
spheric and climate science jargon is used in the book that
wasn’t adequately deﬁned: A glossary would have been help-
ful, but these days a quick Google search probably worksjust as well.
In reading how the early climate models evolved, I was
impressed by the ingenuity with which the modelers worked
around the severe constraints in computational power.
Approximations (aka parameterizations) were formulated torepresent physical processes that either could not be spatially
resolved and/or were imperfectly understood at the time. As
a graduate student, I read a copy of the (handwritten!) notes
describing the climate model from the Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics Laboratory where Manabe worked, and this book
reminded me of the simple yet effective parameterizations
that they used: For example, convective adjustment to repre-sent the net effect of small-scale convection at the model
grid scale, and the unforgettable “bucket model” for model-
ing land hydrological processes. While the authors did not
articulate the emotional aspects of their scientiﬁc journey,
the historical narrative did help me imagine being part of
159 Am. J. Phys. 90(2), February 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 159 04 October 2023 23:02:48
that discovery process. What wonder and excitement they
must have felt when they saw that the simulated temperature
and precipitation looked remarkably like that of the actual
Earth!
An unusual aspect of this book is the detail offered on the
nitty-gritty of modeling: How the model is conﬁgured and
run, how the output is dissected, and so forth. All this is quitefamiliar to those engaged in climate modeling, but I have not
seen this level of detail in a book before. I might have pre-
ferred less technical detail in favor of more detail on the his-torical context, but that could be because I am all too
familiar with the former. A casual reader might appreciate
seeing the technical details to get a sense of the strengths andweaknesses of climate modeling.
The beneﬁts of using this book for teaching are obvious to
me. For my undergraduate climate and earth science courses,I would use parts of the book to complement existing texts:
The detailed descriptions offered would help students under-
stand the deeper physical meaning of various climate pro-cesses. For a graduate seminar, I can imagine offering a
semester-long course on climate modeling based on the orig-
inal papers referenced in the book and with the book provid-ing the overarching scientiﬁc and historical narrative.
I started my own academic journey with the intention of
entering a “traditional” ﬁeld within physics, but switched toclimate science during my graduate studies when I was
introduced to the world of climate modeling. The global
atmospheric and oceanic processes they represented cap-
tured my imagination, and I was intrigued by the possibilitythey afforded to explore the workings of Earth’s climate.
Manabe and Broccoli’s book show how this possibility was
fully realized by the pioneers of climate modeling, and howtheir explorations ultimately led to the discovery of global
warming and its ramiﬁcations. Climate modeling today is
driven by the need for predicting future changes, so theemphasis now tilts towards engineering with increasing
complexity of incorporated processes into Earth System
models and increasing spatial resolution aided by supercom-puters with lots of data storage. However, the book serves as
a powerful reminder of how curiosity-driven explorations
with simpler models are still valuable, and indeed needed,for providing new insights on the physical world that welive in and depend upon.
John C. H. Chiang is a Professor of Geography at the
University of California, Berkeley. His research expertise is onlarge-scale climate dynamics and with interest in both modern-day climate and paleoclimate questions. His teaching interestsinclude climate dynamics, earth science, and the science andimplications of global warming.
AJP Index to Advertisers
ALPHA Immersions Ad . ............................. Cover 2
AAPT Membership. ................................. Page 81
AAPT ComPADRE ................................. Page 83
AAPT Summer 2022 Meeting ......................... Page 84
AAPT Career Center ...................................T O C
160 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Book Reviews 160 04 October 2023 23:02:48
