
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2022
Calculation and measurement of center of mass: An all-in-
one activity using Tangram puzzles 
Jose M. Campillo-Robles ; Ibon Alonso ; Ane Gondra ; Nerea Gondra
Am. J. Phys.  90, 652 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0061884
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Basic literacy and numerical skills through using puzzle media in early childhood
AIP Conf. Proc.  (September 2023)
The ef fect of mathematics games to the student perception of mathematics subject: A case study in
Sekolah Kebangsaan Bukit Kuda, Klang
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2013) 04 October 2023 23:15:39
Calculation and measurement of center of mass: An all-in-one activity
using Tangram puzzles
Jose M. Campillo-Robles,a)Ibon Alonso,b)Ane Gondra,c)and Nerea Gondrad)
Zientzia eta Teknologia Fakultatea, UPV/EHU, Sarriena auzoa z/g, 48940, Leioa, Basque Country, Spain
(Received 30 June 2021; accepted 24 June 2022)
We present a simple, low-cost activity for students in a university-level introductory physics
course. The main objective of the activity is to calculate and experimentally measure the center ofmass of a 2D Tangram ﬁgure using complementary techniques. First, the algebraic and numerical
results for the center of mass of the Tangram pieces are checked analytically and using
mathematical software. Students then create their own Tangram ﬁgure and calculate its center ofmass using formulas from physics tables. CAD software is also used to obtain the ﬁgure’s center of
mass. Finally, the center of mass is measured experimentally, and a comparison with the
theoretical results is made. The modularity of the activity allows instructors’ ﬂexibility to design anad hoc activity to emphasize individual subjects according to the needs of their course.
#2022
Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0061884
I. INTRODUCTION
First introduced by the Greek scientist Archimedes of
Syracuse,1the ancient concept of the center of gravity origi-
nated directly from physics. Nevertheless, the center of grav-
ity has applications in many other disciplines, includingengineering, mathematics, physiology, statistics, military sci-ences, and philosophy. In physics, the center of gravity is
closely related to other two important concepts: the center of
mass
2,3and the centroid. In fact, those three concepts are
used almost interchangeably, principally in introductory uni-versity physics (see the Appendix for equivalence condi-
tions).
4–6Since the gravitational ﬁeld can be considered to
be uniform for most of the systems analyzed in introductoryphysics, and the centroid is a purely mathematical deﬁnition,we will focus on the center of mass throughout the paper.
The accurate calculation of the position of the center of
mass is an essential task in static structure design (buildings,
bridges, etc.) in the manufacturing of many devices (such asrobots and vehicles) or even when considering motion of thehuman body.
7,8For example, aligning the direction of thrust
of a rocket motor so that it pushes exactly through the rock-
et’s center of mass is necessary to achieve a straight ﬂight.9
In introductory physics courses, calculations and measure-
ments of the position of the center of mass are often limitedto a few of the simplest cases. In lectures, the centers of
mass of simple 2D and 3D bodies are usually calculated
using tables. In the physics laboratory, two activities that arecommonly employed are hanging of simple 2D geometricﬁgures and oscillating/balancing toys (roly-poly toy, balanc-
ing bird, etc.).
10,11Qualitative demonstrations performed
with toys are probably insufﬁcient to illuminate all aspectsof the topic, as they usually ignore the necessary detailedcalculations.
In this paper, we propose a versa tile and economical activity,
which makes use of tools that ﬁrst-year students can handle, to
calculate and measure centers of mass. This activity aims tointegrate theory with experiment, connecting equations, andmeasurements. In Sec. II, we brieﬂy explain the main character-
istics of the Tangram puzzle and the pieces used to build 2D
ﬁgures. In Sec. III, the methodology of the activity is explained
in three phases. The center of mass is obtained by means ofseveral complementary methods. Because the ﬁgures consist of
simple Tangram pieces, the position of the center of mass can
be easily calculated using the positions of the centers of eachpiece. In addition, one novel method uses CAD (Computer-Aided Design) software to calculate the center of mass. The
ﬁnal step of the activity is an experimental measurement of the
center of mass, which can be performed using one of the twodifferent methods. Finally, we summarize and discuss the main
points in Sec. IV.
II. THE TANGRAM PUZZLE
The Tangram is a traditional Chinese puzzle game, which
has seven ﬂat pieces called tans
12–14(Fig. 1(a)). Tans can be
ﬁtted together to form a variety of geometric ﬁgures. The
aim of this simple game is to create silhouettes of recogniz-
able ﬁgures, like birds, cats, persons, etc. Some research hasalready been conducted on the use of Tangrams in several
scientiﬁc ﬁelds ranging from medicine to technology and
particularly in mathematics. Due to the ﬂexibility that theTangram provides, it is ideally suited for educational activi-ties. Although Tangrams are used to teach physics in primary
or secondary schools,
15we are not aware of Tangram-based
activities suitable for introductory university physics.
Since the tans are pieces with simple geometrical shapes,
their centers of mass are easy to calculate. In order toincrease the complexity of the mathematical calculations, we
have added two circular pieces to the Tangram puzzle: one
semicircle and one 150
/C14circular section (Fig. 1(b)). These
two pieces can be crafted from foam board, balsa wood, orother similar materials. If necessary, circular pieces with dif-
ferent angles and radii can be used in the activity in order to
keep student groups honest. It is important to avoid the angleof 45
/C14, which gives the same value of sine and cosine in the
calculations. Angles, such as 135 8or 225 8, should be
avoided for similar reasons. These pieces allow for the con-
struction of a wide variety of complex ﬁgures whose centersof mass can be derived from the positions of the individualtans. Finally, the Tangram also allows for the construction of
objects with inhomogeneous distributions of mass, so that a
difference between the centroid and the center of mass isachieved and can be visually demonstrated.
652 Am. J. Phys. 90(9), September 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 652 04 October 2023 23:15:39
III. METHODOLOGY
This activity was initially created for ﬁrst-year engineer-
ing students, who are developing skill in physics, mathemat-
ics, programming, and technical drawing. However, it canalso be adapted for higher level engineering courses (applied
mechanics, statics) or for any general physics course.
A schematic diagram of the activity appears in Fig. 2. This
methodology has three phases with a ﬂexible arrangement
depending on the learning objectives pursued. The third
phase of the activity consists of different modules; eachmodule corresponds to one of the subjects mentioned above
(physics, mathematics, programming, and technical drawing)
and is independent of the others. By choosing the module(s)of interest, instructors can adapt the contents to the learning
goals and time constraints for their course.
In the supplementary material,
16readers can ﬁnd an
Instructor’s Guide (with a worked example explained step-
by-step) and a Laboratory Guide for students. These guides
provide the reader with additional details on the activity andalso serve as resources for instructors intending to implement
a version of the activity in their own course. The minimum
time required for students to perform all the tasks in the
activity is around 10 h. The required time could be reduced
or increased depending on the number of tasks selected andhow deeply each subject is studied.
A. Phase one: Creation of the 2D figure with Tangram
pieces
A commercial Tangram puzzle is provided to each student
team. Students start the activity by measuring the geometric
and physical properties of each tan, i.e., dimensions and mass,
and evaluating the uncertainties in those measurements. Nopredetermined ﬁgure is given to the students; they have to cre-
ate their own ﬁgures.
Student teams are tasked with creating six ﬁgures using
some of the tans of Tangram puzzle and at least one of thecircular ones. Figure 3shows some ﬁgures developed by stu-
dents. Once they have created the six ﬁgures, they are asked
to choose one of them. All student teams will have a differ-ent Tangram ﬁgure.
B. Phase two: Theoretical calculation of the center
of mass
Student teams are then tasked with calculating the center
of mass of the ﬁgure, integrating skills of different disci-
plines (Fig. 2). The work that student teams have to perform
in each discipline is as follows.
1. Mathematics and programming
Fundamental physics books have tables of centers of mass
for homogeneous geometric bodies (1D, 2D, and 3D).
Integration is used to analytically calculate the position ofthe center of mass for all the individual geometric pieces of
their ﬁgure, conﬁrming existing tabulated formulas. We ask
them to calculate the integrals on their own and then checkthem using free software for symbolic calculus such asOctave, SymPy, SageMath, Maxima, or Wolfram Alpha.
Fig. 1. (a) Pieces of Chinese Tangram puzzle and (b) complementary circu-
lar pieces.
Fig. 2. A schematic diagram of the activity: phase one (creativity): design of Tangram ﬁgures and selection of the ﬁgure, phase two: theoretical calcu lation of
center of mass by different approaches (physics, mathematics, programming, and CAD drawing), and phase three: experimental validation.
Fig. 3. Some Tangram ﬁgures created by students: (a) helicopter, (b) ﬂyingsaucer, (c) fat cat, and (d) bird.
653 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Campillo-Robles et al. 653 04 October 2023 23:15:39
2. Physics
Students are asked to calculate numerically the center
of mass of the designed Tangram ﬁgure using previouslyobtained formulas. To complete this calculation, eachcomponent piece of the complex ﬁgure with mass m
i
can be replaced by a point mass milocated at that piece’s
center of mass. Then, assuming the pieces have the samedensity and thickness t, the following formula can be
used:r
cm¼X
riViX
Vi¼tX
riAi
tX
Ai¼X
riAiX
Ai; (1)
where Vi,Ai, and riare, respectively, the volume, area, and
position vector of the center of mass of each piece. A com-
mon coordinate system must be employed in calculation
using Eq. (1). Therefore, the coordinates for the centers of
mass obtained using the tables must be changed to the abso-
lute coordinate system according to the position and orienta-
tion of each piece in the Tangram ﬁgure (see Fig. 4).
Students evaluate numerically the positions of the centers of
mass by hand or using numerical calculation software. A
photograph and a Python-based image processing softwarecan also be used.
17
3. Computer-aided design
CAD drawing is a compulsory subject for engineering stu-
dents, but it is not normally integrated in physics laboratories.The current widespread use of 3D printers is one reason that
proﬁciency in CAD is an appealing and useful skill, even for
students outside of engineering (see, for instance, Ref. 18and
references therein). In this task, students are asked to draw their
2D Tangram ﬁgure in CAD software, like FreeCAD. Such soft-
ware usually provides important physical properties of thedrawn ﬁgure such as centroid and moment of inertia.
Therefore, after drawing the ﬁgure, the position of the centroid
(which coincides with the center of mass for a homogeneousﬁgure) can be directly obtained, as shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 4. Tangram ﬁgure with the relative coordinate systems ( xi–yj) and cen-
ters of mass (crossed circles) of each piece together with the absolute coordi-
nate system ( x–y) used for calculations. This picture can be obtained from
CAD drawing software.
Fig. 5. CAD drawing of one Tangram ﬁgure: (a) geometrical information and (b) physical information obtained from the software.
654 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Campillo-Robles et al. 654 04 October 2023 23:15:39
C. Phase three: Experimental measurement
Finally, students are invited to check the theoretical results
by performing an experiment. It is important to note here thedifference among the centroid, the center of mass, and thecenter of gravity. The centroid of the ﬁgure is the same asthe center of mass as long as the density of the ﬁgure ishomogeneous. The experiments suggested below are per-formed under the action of gravity, allowing for the determi-nation of the center of gravity. For homogeneous objectsnear the surface of the Earth, the centroid, the center ofmass, and the center of gravity are all indistinguishable.Therefore, when the center of gravity of a homogeneousobject is measured in such experiments, we are also measur-ing the centroid and the center of mass.
Several methods can be found in the literature to measure
the center of gravity of rigid bodies.
19–26There is even a
way to measure the position of the centroid for planar ﬁg-ures.27Here, we use a conventional measurement described
in textbooks, which can also be used as an alternative deﬁni-tion of the center of gravity (or center of mass).6A rigid ver-
sion of the selected Tangram ﬁgure is needed, and it can bebuilt using the same material used to make the circularshapes. The rigid ﬁgure is hung from different points, andvertical lines are drawn on it from the hanging point with theaid of a plumb line (Fig. 6). The lines intersect at the center
of gravity of the ﬁgure; the absolute reference system used inthe calculations (Figs. 4and5) should be used to obtain its
coordinates.
A modiﬁcation of the Tangram ﬁgure can be introduced to
distinguish the concepts of centroid and center of mass/gravity.Some tans that are part of the ﬁgure can be attached tothe rigid version of the ﬁgure at their corresponding positions
to increase the mass in certain regions (Fig. 7(a)).
Consequently, after repeating the measurement, the positionof the center of mass is changed (see the intersection point ofdashed lines in Fig. 7(b)), although the shape of the ﬁgure
and, therefore, the centroid remain the same (see the inter-section point of solid lines in Fig. 7(b)).
For instructors who would like to increase the physics
content of the activity to include dynamics, a second methodof validation, involving simple harmonic motion, can also beused. Students can hang the Tangram ﬁgure to create a phys-ical pendulum and measure its oscillation period T(for small
angles) around at least two axes of rotation. For each axis,students can calculate the distance dfrom the axis to the cen-
ter of mass using the equation
T¼2pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
I
mgds
; (2)
where mis the mass of the ﬁgure, gis the gravitational accel-
eration, and the corresponding moment of inertia Ican be
obtained directly from CAD software. Then, using a com-
pass, students can determine the position of the center ofmass from the intersection points of circles centered at the
selected axes. This method requires more calculations to
obtain the results and also requires a higher physical knowl-edge. More advanced students could also perform the com-plete calculation of the moments of inertia using similar
methods to those described in this paper.
IV. CONCLUSION
A cheap and simple activity has been described to calcu-
late and measure the center of mass of 2D ﬁgures. A samplestudent laboratory manual and a detailed instructor’s guide
to the activity are provided as the supplementary material.
27
Rigid bodies are designed using a Tangram puzzle, which
consists of simple geometrical shapes, so that the calcula-
tions and experiments are easy to perform. First, several
approaches are used to obtain the theoretical position of thecenter of mass. Apart from the direct use of formulas avail-
able in physics tables, students can also reproduce those
equations integrating by hand or with mathematical software.Students may also calculate the center of mass using CAD
software. All the methods are easy enough to be handled by
ﬁrst year students. Afterwards, the theoretical results can betested experimentally. One standard measurement method isbased on static equilibrium. Alternatively, an experimental
method based on simple harmonic motion is also proposed.
Inhomogeneous ﬁgures with the same shape are also easy tocreate using the Tangram pieces. Using those inhomoge-
neous ﬁgures, students can check experimentally that the
center of mass/gravity and centroid differ for an inhomoge-neous object. The modularity of the activity allows it to be
adapted for use in any general physics course or a course on
any other STEM subject even at sophomore level (appliedmechanics, statics). This activity provides students with a
clear task, the result of which is not known prior to the
experiment. Multiple consistency checks on the ﬁnal resultcan be performed, allowing students can develop scientiﬁc
reasoning skills in a non-prescriptive project-based
environment.
Fig. 6. Experimental evaluation of the position of the center of mass of the
homogeneous 2D ﬁgure. Although two lines would be enough to ﬁnd its
position (a) and (b), a third line is recommended (c) to check the procedure.
Fig. 7. Experimental evaluation of the position of the center of mass for an
inhomogeneous 2D ﬁgure.
655 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Campillo-Robles et al. 655 04 October 2023 23:15:39
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank M. Gonzalez for helping
in the initial preparation and all the students that have takenpart in this motivating activity.
APPENDIX: EQUIVALENCE CONDITIONS
In undergraduate physics teaching, it is typically assumed
that the center of gravity, the center of mass, and the centroidare identical; in most of the cases, this is true. The equiva-lence conditions of these three concepts depend on the gravi-tational ﬁeld and the homogeneity of the body:
•Uniform gravitational ﬁeld. The center of mass does notdepend on the gravitational ﬁeld. Indeed, when the gravi-tational ﬁeld is uniform ( g¼constant), the center of mass
and the center of gravity of an object coincide. For sufﬁ-ciently small everyday objects, this is true to a very goodapproximation due to the negligible variation of the gravi-tational ﬁeld near Earth’s surface. Examples where signiﬁ-cant differences exist between the center of mass and thecenter of gravity are typically found in astrophysics or
astronautical engineering.
•Homogeneous body. If a rigid body has a uniform density,
its center of mass depends only on the geometry of thebody. The centroid and the center of mass (or gravity) canusually be distinguished because objects around us usuallyhave inhomogeneous densities.
If both conditions hold (the body has a uniform density
and the gravitational ﬁeld is uniform), the centroid is thesame as the center of gravity and the center of mass.
a)ORCID: 0000-0002-2565-6343.
b)ORCID: 0000-0003-3585-2214.
c)ORCID: 0000-0002-1371-5166.
d)ORCID: 0000-0001-6345-3670.
1A. K. T. Assis, Archimedes, The Center of Gravity, and the First Law of
Mechanics: The Law of the Lever (Apeiron, Montreal, 2010).
2M. Ference and A. M. Weinberg, “Center of gravity and center of mass,”
Am. J. Phys. 6, 106 (1938).
3R. D. Edge, “Distinction between center of mass and center of gravity—
Oscillation of rod shaped satellite as an example,” Am. J. Phys. 53,
1002–1004 (1985).
4G. O. Gale, “Theorems on centers of gravity,” A m .J .P h y s . 22, 473–476 (1954).
5R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on
Physics (vol 1.): Mainly Mechanics, Radiation and Heat (Addison Wesley
Publishing, Boston, 1963).
6J. Meriam, L. Kraige, and J. N. Bolton, Engineering Mechanics: Statics ,
9th ed. (Wiley, New York, 2017), pp. 108–110.
7M. P. Murray, A. Seireg, and R. C. Scholz, “Center of gravity, center ofpressure, and supportive forces during human activities,” J. Appl. Physiol.
23(6), 831–838 (1967).8N. Yoganandan, F. A. Pintar, J. Zhang, and J. L. Baisden, “Physical prop-
erties of the human head: Mass, center of gravity and moment of inertia,”J. Biomech. 42, 1177–1192 (2009).
9S. Chesi, Q. Gong, and M. Romano, “Aerodynamic three-axis attitude sta-
bilization of a spacecraft by center-of-mass shifting,” J. Guid. Control
Dyn. 40(7), 1613–1626 (2017).
10B. Finio, “‘X’ marks the spot: Finding the center of mass,” Sci. Am. (pub-
lished online, August 11, 2016), https://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/
article/x-marks-the-spot-ﬁnding-the-center-of-mass/ .
11A. T. Stewart, “Two circle roller,” Am. J. Phys. 34, 166–167 (1966).
12J. Slocum, J. Botermans, D. Gebhardt, M. Ma, X. Ma, H. Raizer, D.
Sonneveld, and C. V. Splunteren, The Tangram Book: The Story of the
Chinese Puzzle With Over 2000 Puzzles to Solve (Sterling Publishing,
New York, 2004).
13M. Gardner, “On the fanciful history and the creative challenges of thepuzzle game of Tangrams,” Sci. Am. 231(2), 98–103 (1974).
14X. X. Tian, “The art and mathematics of tangrams,” in Bridges
Conference 2012: Mathematics, Music, Art, Architecture, Culture (TheBridges Organization, 2012).
15N. Jain, “Exploring interactive Tangrams for teaching basic school phys-
ics,” Ph.D. thesis (Georgia Institute of Technology, 2010), <https://smar-
tech.gatech.edu/handle/1853/34755 >.
16See the supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0061884 for a detailed step-by-step guide for instructors and an
example of guide notes for students.
17A. Gahramanova, “Locating centers of mass with image processing,”Undergrad. J. Math. Model. 10(1), 1–24 (2019).
18E. Brekke, T. Bennett, H. Rook, and E. L. Hazlett, “3D printing an
external-cavity diode laser housing,” Am. J. Phys. 88(12), 1170–1174
(2020).
19X. Zhang, M. Wang, W. Tang, and J. Wang, “A ﬂexible measurementtechnique for testing the mass and center of gravity of large-sized objects,”Meas. Sci. Technol. 31, 015006 (2020).
20S. C. Shapiro, C. P. Dickerson, S. M. Arndt, M. W. Arndt, and G. A.
Mowry, “Error analysis of center-of-gravity measurement techniques,”SAE Trans. 104, 21–32 (1995), <http://www.jstor.org/stable/44612181 >.
21Y. M. M. Yamanaka, K. Kameoka, A. Okunosono, and T. Kinoshita,
“Measuring the center of gravity with truck scale,” in SICE AnnualConference 2011, Japan, Tokyo (2011).
22L. Teng, H. Yang, and Z. Jin, “Novel measurement method for determin-ing mass characteristics of pico-satellites,” Appl. Sci. 8(1), 104 (2018).
23D. Modenini, G. Curzi, and P. Tortora, “Experimental veriﬁcation of a
simple method for accurate center of gravity determination of smallsatellite platforms,” Int. J. Aerosp. Eng. 2018 , 1–10.
24L. Tang and W.-B. Shangguan, “An improved pendulum method for the
determination of the center of gravity and inertia tensor for irregular-shaped bodies,” Measurement 44(10), 1849–1859 (2011).
25M. Gobbi, G. Mastinu, and G. Previati, “A method for measuring the iner-
tia properties of rigid bodies,” Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 25(1), 305–318
(2011).
26M. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Tang, and J. Wang, “A structure for accurately
determining the mass and center of gravity of rigid bodies,” Appl. Sci. 9,
2532 (2019).
27C. J. Sangwin, “Locating the center of mass by mechanical means,”J. Oughtred Soc. 15(2), 14–18 (2006), <http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/view-
doc/download?doi=10.1.1.624.6974&rep=rep1&type=pdf >.
656 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Campillo-Robles et al. 656 04 October 2023 23:15:39
