
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkNOTE| SEPTEMBER 01 2023
Climate teaching tidbitsa) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Kyle Forinash  
 ; Roger T obin 
 ; Barbara Whitten  
 ; Richard W olfson  
 ; Beth Parks
Am. J. Phys.  91, 755–756 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0170182
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Physics Back in TIME
The Physics T eacher  (March 2014)
Where an instructor ’s dreams meet reality: T otal available student time
AIP Conference Proceedings  (March 1997)
Reconstruction of teaching materials use socio-scientific issues context on climate change materials and
thus impact in our life
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023) 04 October 2023 22:57:34
Climate teaching tidbitsa)
Kyle Forinash,b)Roger Tobin,c)Barbara Whitten,d)and Richard Wolfson,e)Guest Editors
Beth Parks,f)Editor
(Received 1 August 2023; accepted 1 August 2023)
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0170182
The AJP editors have assembled some short teaching tips
for your use.
ASSESSING HOME SOLAR ENERGY
Solar photovoltaics have reached break-even cost in many
parts of the U.S., making it interesting—and possibly even
useful—for students to assess the cost of photovoltaics fortheir own homes as a project. A calculator provided by the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory allows students to
draw a photovoltaic installation on a satellite image of theirown roofs and determine the size of the installation and the
expected output.
1(If you want to ask students to do more
work, they can instead start with solar insolation data from
weather records, but the calculations for tilt and orientation
angles are tricky.) Then students can get information on thecost of system installation, either records from a state energy
agency or from a commercial site such as Ref. 2. Be careful to
distinguish between costs before or after subsidies. Many sitesoffer to calculate tax credits and other incentives, but they get
out of date quickly, so I ask students to ﬁnd the local, state,
and federal websites describing the incentives. It’s also impor-tant to check the terms for net billing from the utility, since
some states have limitations.
Based on these costs, students can calculate a cost per kWh
of electricity produced and compare it to the current costs. Itwould be possible to include ﬁnancing costs, but it’s also rea-
sonable to guess that the increase in electricity costs over time
balances the ﬁnancing costs. You may also want to ask stu-dents to calculate the cost without subsidies and discuss the
reasons for subsidies, including kickstarting an industry and
accounting for the true costs of electricity,
3as well as the
argument against subsidies that they only beneﬁt the wealthy.
EUNICE NEWTON FOOTE
An interesting example of the way science has often ignored
or forgotten women scientists is the case of the climate scientist
Eunice Newton Foote. Although she published the results of
her experiments on the heat absorption of various gasses(including carbon dioxide and water vapor) in 1856 and was
p r a i s e di na ne a r l yi s s u eo f Scientiﬁc American for her work,
John Tyndall was given credit for the discovery of what laterbecame known as the “greenhouse effect.” Foote’s work, which
was also reported at a meeting of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science, was published three years earlierthan Tyndall’s. As this podcast describes, Foote’s investigations
were rediscovered in 2011, and she now is receiving credit for
showing that Earth’s surface is heated by atmospheric gassesthat absorb radiant energy from the sun.
4
THE ARGONNE GREET MODEL
Developed by scientists at Argonne National Laboratory
and sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy, theGREET (Greenhouse gasses, Regulated Emissions, and
Energy use in Technologies) model is a tool for analyzing
emissions and the total well-to-wheel energy use of various
combinations of fuel, fuel source, and engine technology.5
The spreadsheet requires registration to download but is oth-
erwise free and can be used by students to compare, for
example, a hypothetical hybrid diesel car with a fuel cell carpowered by hydrogen from renewable energy. The spread-
sheet is somewhat complicated but not beyond the abilities
of junior level physics majors as an extended homeworkexercise or semester project.
ENERGY, ENVIRONMENT, AND CLIMATE
The fourth edition of Richard Wolfson’s Energy,
Environment, and Climate has just been published by W. W.
Norton.
6The new edition is a major update to this textbook,
which is aimed at beginning to mid-level undergraduates in
science and nonscience majors alike. The book starts with agrounding in Earth’s history and the planet’s fundamental
energy resources, a survey of human energy use, and two
chapters on the physics of energy, including the all-important second law of thermodynamics. Subsequent chap-
ters detail the energy sources and technologies available to
humankind and include an expanded chapter on the energy
755 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 755 04 October 2023 22:57:34
carriers electricity and hydrogen and especially their roles in
transportation. The last ﬁve chapters cover the science of cli-mate, including the greenhouse effect, human alteration ofclimate, climate modeling and attribution, and future cli-mates. The ﬁnal chapter brings together energy and climateand spells out the urgent need to break the link betweenthem. The fourth edition includes a discussion of the IPCC’sSixth Assessment Report.
Each chapter features end-of-chapter questions, quantita-
tive exercises, and research problems. New to this fourth edi-tion is a “Science Meets Policy” box in every chapter,relating the science content to contemporary policy issues.
A GLOBAL WARMING PRIMER: ANSWERING
YOUR QUESTIONS ABOUT THE SCIENCE,THE CONSEQUENCES, AND THE SOLUTIONS
Jeffrey Bennett’s A Global Warming Primer is just that—
a simple description of the facts and consequences of globalwarming.
7It was published in 2015 but is not particularly
dated. The dearth of equations and problems limits its useful-ness in the classroom, but the focus on data (including manyclearly explained graphs) makes it valuable in its arguments.
There are four chapters. The ﬁrst is a clear and simple
description of global warming, and why there is no scientiﬁcdoubt about its existence. The second is a description of the
skeptics’ debate. Bennett tries to be fair and refrains from
cheap shots and name calling, though there is no doubt abouthis position. This section might help those who are not cer-tain about global warming understand the issues, but it won’tchange the minds of any skeptics. The third chapterdescribes phenomena related to global warming and their
consequences—ocean acidiﬁcation, increased forest ﬁres,and so on. This chapter depends heavily on climate modelsand will be even less convincing to conﬁrmed skeptics. Inthe fourth chapter, Bennett presents his own ideas for a solu-tion. Many will disagree with his determined optimism andhis positive ideas about nuclear ﬁssion and fusion. Finally,the last chapter asks readers to write a letter to their grand-children, explaining their own decision.
This is not a book for scientists—the arguments presented
are familiar. The very clear explanations might be useful inhelping us develop our own explanations to others, or itmight be a book you would give to a relative to help themunderstand and respond to the climate crisis.
a)Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the environ-
ment, sustainability, and climate change.
b)ORCID: 0009-0004-4931-7997.
c)ORCID: 0000-0001-6055-6025.
d)ORCID: 0009-0005-0140-5741.
e)ORCID: 0009-0006-5395-9655.
f)ORCID: 0000-0003-1232-2472.
1<https://pvwatts.nrel.gov >.
2<https://www.energysage.com >.
3Erica Gies, “The real cost of energy,” Nature 551, S145–S147 (2017).
4<https://www.aip.org/initialconditions/eunice-foote-once-forgotten-climate-
science-pioneer >.
5Energy Systems and Infrastructure Analysis, Argonne National Laboratory,
<https://greet.es.anl.gov >.
6Richard Wolfson, Energy, Environment, and Climate , 4th ed. (W.W.
Norton, New York, 2023).
7Jeffrey Bennett, A Global Warming Primer: Answering Your Questions about
the Science, the Consequences, and the Solutions (Big Kid Science, 2016).
AJP Index to Advertisers
AAPT Winter 2023 Meeting. . ......................... Cover 2
AAPT Membership. ................................ Page 661
AAPT ComPADRE ................................ Page 663
APSIT . . ......................................... Page 664
AAPT Career Center ...................................T O C
756 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Forinash et al. 756 04 October 2023 22:57:34
