
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkNOTE| JANUARY 01 2023
Concerning classical forces, energies, and potentials for
accelerated point charges 
Timothy H. Boyer
Am. J. Phys.  91, 74–78 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0094457
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Investigations Concerning Polarization in Barium T itanate Ceramics
J Acoust Soc Am  (June 2005)
Aharonov-Bohm Ef fect—Quantum Ef fects on Charged Particles in Field-Free Regions
American Journal of Physics  (February 1970)
Darwin and his Mathematical Inspirations
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 2008) 04 October 2023 22:48:58
Concerning classical forces, energies, and potentials for accelerated
point charges
Timothy H. Boyera)
Department of Physics, City College of the City University of New York, New York, New York 10031
(Received 3 April 2022; accepted 14 October 2022)
Although expressions for energy densities involving electric and magnetic ﬁelds are exactly
analogous, their connections to forces and electromagnetic potentials are vastly different. Forelectrostatic situations, changes in the electric energy can be related directly to electric forces and to
the electrostatic potential. In contrast, discussions of magnetic forces and energy changes involve
two fundamentally different situations. For charged particles moving with constant velocities, thechanges in both electric and magnetic ﬁeld energies are provided by the external forces that keep the
particles’ velocities constant; there are no Faraday acceleration electric ﬁelds in this situation.
However, for particles that change speed, the changes in magnetic energy density are related to
acceleration-dependent Faraday electric ﬁelds. Current undergraduate and graduate textbooks deal
only with highly symmetric situations, where the Faraday electric ﬁelds are easily calculated from
the time-changing magnetic ﬂux. However, in situations that lack high symmetry, such as themagnetic Aharonov–Bohm situation, the back (Faraday) acceleration electric ﬁelds of point charges
may seem unfamiliar. In this article, we present a simple unsymmetric example and analyze it using
the Darwin Lagrangian. In allcases involving changing velocities of the current carriers, it is the
work done by the back (Faraday) acceleration electric ﬁelds that balances the magnetic energy
changes.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0094457
I. INTRODUCTION
The expression E2=ð8pÞfor the energy density associated
with electric ﬁelds is exactly analogous to the energy density
B2=ð8pÞfor magnetic ﬁelds. However, the connections
between the energy expressions and the forces exerted by the
ﬁelds are vastly different in the electric and magnetic cases.
The work done by electrostatic forces leads directly to changes
in electric ﬁeld energy. On the other hand, magnetic ﬁelds do
no work, so the association between changes in magnetic
energy and work is more subtle. In the quasistatic regime, elec-
tricﬁeld energies depend only upon the relative positions of
charges, whereas magnetic ﬁeld energies depend upon both the
relative positions of charges and also their velocities . Current
electromagnetism textbooks discuss quasistatic magneticenergy changes for only two situations: (1) charges that move
with constant speed and (2) charges which change their speed
but are in highly symmetric conﬁgurations. This limited per-
spective leaves out magnetic energy changes for situations that
lack high symmetry. Here, we present a simple point-charge
example lacking high symmetry, which illustrates the connec-
tions between forces, energies, and potentials in quasistatic
classical electrodynamics when radiation ﬁelds are excluded.
Reference to an analogy may clarify the purpose of the pre-
sent article. Magnetostatics, like electrostatics, involves only
two of Maxwell’s equations: r/C1B¼0a n d r/C2B¼ð4p=cÞJ.
However, if one considers only situations of high symmetry,
then one can apply only Ampere’s law and ignore the diver-
gence requirement for B.T h u s ,i fac u r r e n td e n s i t y JðrÞhas
axial symmetry, Ampere’s law plus symmetry is sufﬁcient to
determine the magnetic ﬁeld B, without any need for the diver-
gence equation. However, these highly symmetric situations
give a limited and false impression of the theory. When the situ-ation lacks high symmetry, then the Biot–Savart law must be
used to determine B. The Biot–Savart law is a particular solu-
tion requiring both Maxwell equations for Band may be com-
plemented by a solution of the homogeneous equations.Similarly, highly symmetric situations involving axial symmetry
give the impression that Faraday’s law r/C2E¼/C0 ð 1=cÞ@B=@t
can be used without the need for the rest of Maxwell’s equa-tions, because the confounding terms are suppressed by the sym-metry. Once again, the symmetric situations give only a limitedunderstanding of slowly varying electromagnetic ﬁelds.
With their understanding limited to symmetric situations,
physicists may be unprepared to analyze situations that lack
high symmetry such as the simple example in the present arti-
cle or such as the Aharonov–Bohm situation. Although the azi-muthally symmetric vector potential associated with a circularsolenoid is often treated in junior-level courses in classicalelectromagnetism,
1the experimentally realized situation of the
magnetic Aharonov–Bohm effect (where electrons pass onboth sides of a long solenoid) involves time-dependent interac-tions whose classical electromagnetic aspects are notazimuth-
ally symmetric. It is often claimed in electromagnetism texts
2
and in quantum texts3that there is no classical electromagnetic
interaction of the solenoid back on the passing electrons. Thisclaim is made despite the magnetic energy changes associatedwith the overlap of a passing electron’s magnetic ﬁeld with thesolenoid’s magnetic ﬁeld, which changes depending on theside of the solenoid that the electron passes. Such no-
interaction claims do not take into account the fact that charges
in the solenoid accelerate in response to the passing charge,resulting in Faraday acceleration ﬁelds that are related to thechanges in magnetic energy. Faraday acceleration ﬁelds associ-ated with magnetic energy changes are treated in the presentarticle; further discussion of the Aharonov–Bohm situation ispresented elsewhere.
4
II. THE DARWIN–LAGRANGIAN APPROXIMATION
A. The Darwin Lagrangian
The classical electrodynamics of charged particles with
arbitrary changing velocities is enormously complicated,
74 Am. J. Phys. 91(1), January 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 74 04 October 2023 22:48:58
particularly because electromagnetic ﬁelds depend upon
sources at retarded times. In order to simplify the situation,
we will consider the behavior of just two point charges that
move at speeds small compared to c, the speed of light in
vacuum. This situation corresponds to that described by the
Darwin Lagrangian. This approximation, which excludes
radiation and involves no retarded times, is an enormoussimpliﬁcation.
The Darwin Lagrangian for two point charges eand q
with positions r
e;rq, and velocities ve;vqis given by5,6
L¼/C0mec2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0v2
e=c2q
/C0mqc2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0v2
q=c2q
/C0eq
jre/C0rqj
þeq
2c2ve/C1vq
jre/C0rqjþve/C1re/C0rq ðÞ½/C138 vq/C1re/C0rq ðÞ½/C138
jre/C0rqj3"#
¼/C0mec2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0v2
e=c2q
/C0mqc2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0v2
q=c2q
/C0eUqðre;tÞþqUerq;tðÞ
2/C20/C21
þeve/C1Aqðre;tÞþqvq/C1Aerq;tðÞ
2c/C20/C21
; (1)
where we have implicitly deﬁned the potentials
Ue;Uq;Ae;Aq; explicit expressions are provided in
Subsection II B. It is understood that the square roots are to
be expanded in powers of 1 =c2through order 1 =c4. Here, we
have chosen not to expand the square roots because main-taining these exact forms leads to familiar expressions for
the particle mechanical energies derived from the
Lagrangian.
B. Potentials and fields in the Darwin–Lagrangian
approximation
For a point charge qlocated at r
qðtÞand moving with
small velocity vqðtÞand acceleration aqðtÞ, through order
1=c2, the Lagrangian in Eq. (1)can be described as involving
a scalar potential
Uqðr;tÞ¼q
jr/C0rqtðÞj; (2)
a vector potential6
Aqr;tðÞ ¼q
2cvq
jr/C0rqjþvq/C1r/C0rq ðÞ½/C138 r/C0rq ðÞ
jr/C0rqj3"#
; (3)
an electric ﬁeld7
Eqðr;tÞ¼/C0 r Uqr;tðÞ /C01
c@Aqr;tðÞ
@t
¼qr/C0rq
jr/C0rqj31þv2
q
2c2/C03
2vq
c/C1r/C0rq
jr/C0rqj/C18/C192"#
/C0q
2c2aq
jr/C0rqjþaq/C1r/C0rq ðÞ½/C138 r/C0rq ðÞ
jr/C0rqj3"#
;
(4)
and a magnetic ﬁeldBqr;tðÞ ¼r/C2 Aqr;tðÞ ¼qvqtðÞ
c/C2r/C0rqtðÞ
jr/C0rqtðÞj3: (5)
In Eqs. (3)and(4), we have suppressed the argument tin
rqðtÞ;vqðtÞ;aqðtÞfor brevity.
C. Comments on the electromagnetic fields in the Darwin
approximation
We notice immediately that the scalar potential in Eq. (2)
is the same as that for a point charge in electrostatics, exceptthat the position r
qðtÞis now time dependent. Similarly, one
might be tempted to use the Biot–Savart law in magneto-
statics for a point charge with Jqðr;tÞ¼qvqðtÞd3ðr/C0rqðtÞÞ
resulting in Eq. (5). However, these electrostatic and magne-
tostatic expressions are now only approximations; by
employing the Darwin Lagrangian, we have moved beyondelectrostatics and magnetostatics into electrodynamics. Just
how different the theory is from electrostatics can be seen in
the expression (4)for the electric ﬁeld, which now involves
velocities and even accelerations of the particle. The scalar
potential appears in connection with the electric ﬁeld E
qðr;tÞ
in Eq. (4)but not in connection with the magnetic ﬁeld
Bqðr;tÞin Eq. (5). The scalar potential Uqðr;tÞdepends on
the relative positions jr/C0rqjof the charge and the ﬁeld
point. On the other hand, the vector potential Aqðr;tÞis con-
nected to both Eqðr;tÞandBqðr;tÞ. The vector potential
Aqðr;tÞdepends not only on the relative displacement
ðr/C0rqÞbetween the charge and the ﬁeld point but also on
the velocity vqof the charge q. The magnetic ﬁeld Bqðr;tÞ
depends upon spatial derivatives of Aqðr;tÞ. In contrast, the
electric ﬁeld Eqðr;tÞin Eq. (4)depends upon the time rate of
change of the vector potential Aqðr;tÞ, which may involve
changes in the charge’s position rqand/or the charge’s veloc-
ityvq. The terms in Eq. (4)forEqðr;tÞinvolving v2
qarise
from position -dependent changes in Aqðr;tÞwith time. The
terms involving acceleration aqarise from time-dependent
changes associated with velocity . The acceleration-
dependent terms give the Faraday acceleration ﬁelds of thecharged particle. The acceleration-dependent terms for the
electric ﬁeld in Eq. (4)appear in an electromagnetism text-
book
7published in 1940 but do not seem to appear in more
recent textbooks.
D. Equations of motion from the Darwin Lagrangian
The Euler–Lagrange equations of motion for the charges e
andqcan be obtained in terms of the canonical momentum
of a particle. However, these equations can be rewritten
in the conventional form for Newton’s second law asdp
mechanical =dt¼qEþqðv=cÞ/C2B, where E¼/C0 r U
/C0ð1=cÞ@A=@tandB¼r/C2 A.
E. The total energy
The system’s total energy follows directly from the
Lagrangian in Eq. (1), giving a sum of mechanical, electric,
and magnetic energies
UtotalðÞ¼UmðÞþUðEÞþUBðÞ; (6)
where the mechanical energy is
75 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Timothy H. Boyer 75 04 October 2023 22:48:58
UmðÞ¼mec2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0v2
e=c2p þmqc2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0v2
q=c2q ; (7)
the electric ﬁeld energy is
UðEÞ¼1
2eUqðre;tÞþqUerq;tðÞ/C2/C3¼eq
jre/C0rqj; (8)
and the magnetic ﬁeld energy is
UBðÞ¼1
2eve
c/C1Aqðre;tÞ/C2/C3þqvq
c/C1Aerq;tðÞ/C2/C3/C20/C21
¼eq
2c2ve/C1vq
jre/C0rqjþve/C1re/C0rq ðÞ½/C138 vq/C1re/C0rq ðÞ½/C138
jre/C0rqj3"#
:
(9)
III. FIELD-POTENTIAL-ENERGY CONNECTIONS
FOR ELECTRIC AND MAGNETIC FIELDS
A. Electric energy changes
In the Darwin approximation, the changes in electric ﬁeld
energy are directly analogous to those familiar from electro-
statics. The electric energy in Eq. (8)involves only the scalar
potentials, which take the same form as in electrostatics. The
electric forces associated with the electric potential are
directly associated with energy in the electric ﬁeld. The elec-
tric energy involves only the separations jre/C0rqjof the
charged particles.
B. Magnetic energy changes
In contrast to electric ﬁeld energy changes, magnetic
energy changes involve both changes in the charges’ separa-tion and also changes in their velocities, as indicated in Eq.
(9). It seems convenient to separate magnetic energy changes
into two separate situations—those involving constant veloc-
ity and those involving accelerating charges.
1. Charged particles moving with constant velocity
The situation of charges moving with constant velocities
turns out to be uncomplicated, and the connections between
forces and energy changes are exactly soluble. It is possible
to change the magnetic ﬁeld energy while keeping the parti-
cle velocities v
eandvqconstant if the charges’ relative dis-
placement ðre/C0rqÞchanges. In such a case, the change in
magnetic ﬁeld energy is provided by the external forces,
which maintain these constant velocities.8There are no
kinetic energy changes and no Faraday acceleration electric
ﬁelds.
A charged particle at rest in an inertial frame does not
cause any emf around any closed curve in that space.
However, a charged particle moving with constant velocity
will indeed cause an emfaround a general closed curve in
the inertial frame. The moving charge has an associated
magnetic ﬁeld, and the resulting emfagrees with the chang-
ing magnetic ﬂux through the closed curve. Thus, depending
upon the speed of the charge in an inertial frame, a charge q
may or may not cause an emf. Indeed, if we are dealing with
only two charges moving with constant velocities, we canalways go to the rest frame of one of the charges leaving us
with only changes in electric ﬁeld energy and no magnetic
ﬁeld energy changes at all.
Situations involving motional emfs are often treated as
though the relevant charge carriers were moving with con-
stant velocity, and so can be understood in terms of energy
changes being balanced by the work done by external
forces.9
2. Accelerating charges
Particularly troubling magnetic energy situations involve
groups of charges where particles change their speeds. These
cases generally involve Faraday acceleration electric forces
and may include particle kinetic energy changes and/orchanges in electromagnetic ﬁeld energy and/or work done by
external forces. We will discuss magnetic energy changes in
two different examples: one highly symmetric situation and
one unsymmetric situation.
IV. SITUATIONS INVOLVING A LONG SOLENOID
A. Azimuthally symmetric solenoid with increasing
currents
The most familiar situation of a back (Faraday) accelera-
tion electric ﬁeld occurs for the highly symmetric situation
of a circular solenoid. When the currents in the solenoid are
constant, the charge carriers are accelerating towards the
central axis since they are moving in a circle. A singlecharge moving in a circle does not have just electrostatic and
magnetostatic ﬁelds but also has higher order terms in 1 =c,
including radiation terms. However, the situation changes for
a many-particle current, which can be approximated as a steady
current. Even though the charges are still accelerating when the
current is constant, all the higher-order contributions to the ﬁelds
cancel, leaving only the electrostatic and magnetostatic contribu-
tions.
10For a circular solenoid, the vector potential Amay be
chosen to be in the azimuthal ^/-direction with A¼^/Br=2
¼^/2pnevr=cinside the solenoid and A¼^/2pnevR2=ðcrÞ
outside the solenoid, where nis the number of current carriers
per unit area, eand vare the charge and speed of each current
carrier, and Ris the radius of the long solenoid. This corre-
sponds to the Coulomb gauge for A.
When the currents in a solenoid are changing in an azi-
muthally symmetric pattern, the charge carriers in the sole-
noid have a tangential acceleration associated with the same
change in speed vfor each charge. The agent changing the
speed of the current carriers must provide the power againstthe back (Faraday) acceleration electric ﬁelds11correspond-
ing to the acceleration terms in Eq. (4). The magnetic energy
balance for quasistatic systems requires the existence of
Faraday electric forces associated with the accelerations of
the charged particles.
The back electric ﬁelds associated with the changing
speeds of the charge carriers can be described in terms of the
changing vector potential. Thus, for a long solenoid with
slowly increasing currents, the changes of speed of all the
current carriers give a changing vector potential with non-zero @A=@tand so a back emf from the non-vanishing
(Faraday) acceleration electric ﬁeld appears from E¼/C0 r U
/C0ð1=cÞ@A=@t. Outside the solenoid, even though the
magnitude of the vector potential is increasing in
A¼^/2pnevR
2=ðcrÞdue to the increase in v, the 1 =rfall-off
76 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Timothy H. Boyer 76 04 October 2023 22:48:58
of the vector potential with distance from the central axis
still gives B¼r/C2 A¼0. To the surprise of many students,
there is an acceleration-dependent electric ﬁeld outside the
solenoid from @A=@t, but still no magnetic ﬁeld outside.
In elementary electromagnetism classes where examples
and problems are highly symmetric, it is easy to relate theback emfof the solenoid to Faraday’s law involving a chang-
ing magnetic ﬁeld
emf¼þ
dr/C1E¼/C01
cd
dtð
dS/C1B/C18/C19
; (10)
where Sis the area and to take advantage of the high symmetry
to calculate E. The textbooks emphasize that changing currents
in a solenoid lead to changing magnetic ﬁelds and, therefore, toFaraday electric ﬁelds. They do not emphasize that this backemfis due directly to the electric ﬁelds produced by the accel-
erating current carriers. There is no need to go through a
changing magnetic ﬁeld to obtain the emf. The same current
carriers that produce the Faraday acceleration electric ﬁeld also
produce the magnetic ﬁeld of the solenoid in the ﬁrst pl ace.
12
B. Unsymmetric situations
The Darwin Lagrangian is rarely mentioned in junior-level
electromagnetism texts. Although the full Lienard–Wiechertﬁelds involving retarded times are often given, the quasistaticapproximation through 1 =c
2for the electric ﬁelds in Eq. (4)goes
unmentioned even in graduate-level texts. Thus, many physicistsare unfamiliar with these acceleration-dependent terms, and sothey are unprepared to understand the classical electromagneticaspects of an unsymmetric situation such as that proposed byAharonov and Bohm where electrons pass a long solenoid.
When an electron passes alongside a long solenoid, the
magnetic ﬁeld of the passing charge will overlap with themagnetic ﬁeld of the solenoid, which changes the total mag-
netic energy, a relativistic 1 =c
2effect. Depending upon
which side the electron passes, the change in total magneticﬁeld energy can be positive or negative. Naturally, one asks,“What provides the energy that balances the magnetic energychange?” If the solenoid is a superconductor, there is noexternal source of energy. In other cases, there is a batteryproviding current to the solenoid and one sometimes hearsthe suggestion that the battery provides the necessary energychanges. However, this side-dependent magnetic energychange does notcorrespond to a highly symmetric situation;
the forces on the charged particles in the solenoid due to thepassing charge’s ﬁelds will be in different directions in dif-
ferent locations , some solenoid charges increasing their
speeds and some decreasing their speeds.
The classical electromagnetic situation of charged particles
passing a long solenoid lacks high symmetry, and therefore, wecannot use symmetry and the integral form of Faraday’s law tocalculate the induced electric ﬁeld, or the force on the passing
electrons. One must turn to a more fundamental analysis such
as one through the Darwin Lagrangian.
13
V. EXAMPLE OF TWO POINT CHARGES MOVING
SIDE-BY-SIDE
A. Side-by-side charges
For the simplest possible illustration of magnetic energy
changes in a situation lacking high symmetry, we considertwo point charges eandqmoving side-by-side with velocity
ve¼vq/C17v, along parallel frictionless rods. The rods are
oriented parallel to the z-axis and are separated by a distance
l¼jre/C0rqj. This system will have both electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds and associated energies. For motion with con-
stant velocity , the electric and magnetic forces of one charge
on the other are perpendicular to the frictionless rods. Thissame system, where the forces of constraint introduce neither
energy nor net linear momentum, was used previously
14as
an illustration of Einstein’s mass-energy relation E¼ mc2.
In Darwin’s 1 =c2approximation for the energy (given
in Eqs. (6)–(9) ), the electric ﬁeld energy is UðEÞðre;rqÞ
¼eq=jre/C0rqj¼eq=las in Eq. (8), whereas the magnetic
ﬁeld energy is given in Eq. (9). For our simple side-by-side
situation, where re/C0rqis perpendicular to v, we have the
magnetic ﬁeld energy
UBðÞre;rq;v ðÞ ¼eqv2
2c2l: (11)
B. Accelerating the system of two point charges
Suppose that external forces FðeÞ
extandFðqÞ
extparallel to the z-
axis are applied to the two charges so as to give the particles
a small common acceleration a¼^zafor a short time s, thus
changing the particles’ common speed by Dv¼as. The
kinetic energy mc2ðc/C01Þof each particle changes due to
the change in speed. The electric ﬁeld energy does notchange according to the Darwin approximation in Eq. (8).
However, the magnetic ﬁeld energy changes from that given
in Eq. (11)over to that with
vreplaced by vþDv, so that
DUBðÞ¼eqvþDv ðÞ2
2c2l/C0eqv2
2c2lueqvDv
c2l: (12)
During the acceleration of the parallel-moving charges eand
q, the vector potential A¼AeþAqchanges as the speed
changes, leading to changes in the magnetic ﬁeld and in the
magnetic ﬁeld energy. The acceleration of the charges and the
change in the vector potential Aalso leads to a change in
the electric ﬁeld through E¼/C0 r U/C0ð1=cÞ@A=@t. Thus, the
electric ﬁeld has a new acceleration-related component paral-
lelto the velocity vof the particles. Therefore, from Eq. (4),
each charge exerts an additional ( acceleration-dependent ) elec-
tric force
eEacc/C0q¼qEacc/C0e¼/C0eqa
2c2jre/C0rqj¼/C0eqa
2c2l; (13)
aretarding force, on the other charge. However, now
Newton’s second law for the mechanical momentum change
in the z-direction for each particle involves twoforces, both
the external force and the electric force of one charge on the
other
dpe
dt¼FeðÞ
ext/C0eqa
2c2landdpq
dt¼FqðÞ
ext/C0qea
2c2l: (14)
Therefore, the external forces (which provided the accelera-
tionaof the charges) have to be larger in magnitude than
these retarding forces. Rewriting Newton’s second-law equa-
tions in Eq. (14), we require
77 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Timothy H. Boyer 77 04 October 2023 22:48:58
FeðÞ
ext¼dpe
dtþeqa
2c2land FqðÞ
ext¼dpq
dtþqea
2c2l: (15)
The change in the energy of the system due to the external
forces is
DUtotalðÞ¼ðs
0dtFeðÞ
extþFqðÞ
ext/C16/C17
/C1v
¼ðs
0dtdpe
dtþdpq
dtþeqa
c2l/C18/C19
/C1v
uDUmeðÞþDUmqðÞþeqv/C1as
c2l
¼DUmeðÞþDUmqðÞþeqvDv
c2l; (16)
where we have used Dv¼asand have kept only ﬁrst-order
terms. Thus, the external forces indeed account for the
energy change, both the mechanical energy change
DUðmeÞþDUðmqÞ(from the time-integrations over the
changes in momentum) and also the magnetic energy change
(from the time-integration over the Faraday acceleration
electric ﬁelds) corresponding to Eq. (12).
We emphasize again: The magnetic energy balance for
quasistatic systems requires the existence of Faraday electric
forces associated with the accelerations of the charged par-
ticles. These Faraday electric ﬁelds from accelerating
charges become important in groups of closely spaced
charges, and failure to recognize them in unsymmetric casescan lead to paradoxes.4
This example involving two point charges illustrates some
of the contrasts involving forces, energies, and potentials for
the electric and magnetic ﬁelds. In the electric case, the workassociated with the electric ﬁeld appears directly as energy
stored in the electric ﬁelds, as is familiar in electrostatics. In
the magnetic case, external or internal forces can change the
speeds of the particles that are producing the magnetic ﬁelds
which, in turn, leads to changes in magnetic energy.However, the change of charged particles’ speeds also causes
back (Faraday) acceleration electric ﬁelds, which make it
harder for the external or internal forces to accelerate the
charges. It is the additional work against the back (Faraday)
acceleration electric ﬁelds that balances the change in mag-netic ﬁeld energy.
VI. CLOSING SUMMARY
The Darwin energy expressions in Eqs. (6)–(9) give the
energy of two low-speed interacting charges. The electric ﬁeld
energy is the familiar expression from electrostatics. The mag-
netic ﬁeld energy involves the separations and veloc ities of the
charged particles. There are no Faraday acceleration electric
ﬁelds for charges moving with constant velocities, and any
change in magnetic ﬁeld energy is provided by the external
forces, which keep the particles’ velocities constant.
8On the
other hand, the magnetic ﬁeld energy can also change due toaccelerations a
eandaqof the charges. In this case, the change
in magnetic ﬁeld energy is associated with the Faraday accelera-
tion terms in the electric ﬁeld given in Eq. (4).
Particularly for situations where the speed of current
carriers varies, the vector potential Aðr;tÞserves as an inter-
mediate connection between magnetic ﬁelds and electricﬁelds through B¼r/C2 AandE¼/C0 r U/C0ð1=cÞ@A=@t.
Any external or internal agent that tries to accelerate thecurrent carriers pr oduces a time-changing vector potential,
which creates an electric ﬁeld that (ﬁtting with Lenz’s law) triesto balance the energy change against work done by the agent.The change in the speed of the current carriers may produce achange in the magnetic ﬁeld energy; this change is consistent
with energy conservation because the external or internal agentcausing the change had to do additional work against the backFaraday electric ﬁelds of the accelerating charges.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This article was stimulated by a manuscript of Dr. Hanno
Ess/C19en discussing magnetic energy changes, “A classical
Aharonov-Bohm effect arises when one goes beyond the testparticle approximation.” The author is grateful to twoanonymous referees whose extensive and helpful commentsimproved this article.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no known conﬂict of interest.
a)ORCID: 0000-0003-2267-6290.
1D. J. Grifﬁths, Introduction to Electrodynamics , 4th ed. (Pearson, New
York, 2013), pp. 247–248.
2A. Shadowitz, The Electromagnetic Field (Dover, New York, 1988), pp.
197, 208–209, 517–522; A. Garg, Classical Electromagnetism in a
Nutshell (Princeton U. P., Princeton, NJ, 2012), pp. 107–108.
3See, for example, D. J. Grifﬁths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics , 2nd
ed. (Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2005), pp. 384–391 or
L. E. Balentine, Quantum Mechanics (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
New Jersey, 1990), pp. 220–223.
4T. H. Boyer, “The Aharonov–Bohm phase shift as a relativity “paradox”and “A classical electromagnetic basis for the Aharonov–Bohm phase
shift” ” (submitted).
5C. G. Darwin, “The dynamical motions of charged particles,” Phil. Mag.
39, 537–551 (1920).
6J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics , 2nd ed. (John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1975), pp. 593–595 and p. 616, Problem 12.12.
7L. Page and N. I. Adams, Electrodynamics (Van Nostrand, New York,
1940), p. 175. See also, L. Page and N. I. Adams, “Action and reaction
between moving charges,” Am. J. Phys. 13, 141–147 (1945).
8T. H. Boyer, “Energy and momentum in electromagnetic ﬁeld for charged par-
ticles moving with constant velocities,” A m .J .P h y s . 39, 257–270 (1971).
9See Ref. 1, pp. 373–378.
10See Ref. 6, p. 697, Problems 14.12 and 14.13.
11If there were no change in magnetic ﬁeld energy, the agent causing the car-
riers to change speed would need to provide power so as to change only
the kinetic energy of the current carriers. This change in kinetic energy ofthe current carriers is so small as to escape any mention in classical elec-
tromagnetism textbooks. It is the change in magnetic ﬁeld energy that is
overwhelmingly dominant.
12T. H. Boyer, “Faraday induction and the current carriers in a circuit,” Am.
J. Phys. 83, 263–271 (2015).
13T. H. Boyer, “Classical electromagnetic deﬂections and lag effects associated
with quantum interference pattern shifts: Considerations related to theAharonov–Bohm effect,” Phys. Rev. D 8, 1679–1693 (1973); “The
Aharonov–Bohm effect as a classical electromagnetic lag effect: An electro-
static analogue and possible experimental test,” Il Nuovo Cimento 100,
685–701 (1987); “Does the Aharonov-Bohm effect exist?” Found. Phys. 30,
893–905 (2000); “Classical electromagnetism and the Aharonov–Bohm phase
shift,” Found. Phys. 30, 907–932 (2000); “Darwin–Lagrangian analysis for
the interaction of a point charge and a magnet: Considerations related to thecontroversy regarding the Aharonov–Bohm and Aharonov–Casher phase
shifts,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 39, 3455–3477 (2006).
14T. H. Boyer, “Electrostatic potential energy leading to an inertial mass
change for a system of two point charges,” Am. J. Phys. 46, 383–385
(1978).
78 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Timothy H. Boyer 78 04 October 2023 22:48:58
