
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2023
Effects of greenhouse gases on Earth, V enus, and Mars:
Beyond the one-blanket modela) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Philip C. Nelson  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 721–730 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0125523
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Filtering Action of a Blanket Dome
J Acoust Soc Am  (July 2005)
Performance of a blanket in the presence of flow
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005)
Thermal Control T echnology Developments for a V enus Lander
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2010) 04 October 2023 22:56:54
Effects of greenhouse gases on Earth, Venus, and Mars: Beyond
the one-blanket modela)
Philip C. Nelsonb)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104
(Received 12 September 2022; accepted 27 March 2023)
I present a discussion of the effect of increasing carbon dioxide on planetary climate, at a level
suitable for insertion as a module into an upper-level Physics course. The treatment includes twokey ingredients that are often missing from more elementary discussions, yet are amenable to
analytic methods: First, that convection implies a dependence of surface temperature on the height
of the outermost infrared-thick layer; and second, that increasing the level of CO
2closes spectral
windows of absorption. These themes are applicable not only to an industrializing Earth but also to
our neighboring planets. #2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0125523
I. INTRODUCTION
Many Physics students have been exposed to models of
the warming inﬂuence of increasing CO 2, but often via a
very simple “one-blanket” model. Although that is a goodstart, students may then be left wondering
•‘‘The most abundant green house gas by far is H
2O;
and we have no control over it ;so how can reducing
CO 2emission be relevant ?}
•‘‘In the CO 2absorption bands the atmosphere
is already completely opaque ;and you can0t exceed
100% absorption ;
so how can adding more hurt ?} (1)
Every citizen needs some crisp, qualitative answers to
these questions. One sometimes gets the impression that tooffer convincing replies requires considerable formalmachinery, including solution of the Schwarzschild equationof radiative transport. Indeed, some textbook discussionsjump directly from a highly simpliﬁed model to the conclu-sions of state-of-the-art general circulation models, whichstudents must then take on faith.
This article will attempt to bridge the gap in a way that
can be inserted as a short module into a standard existing
course such as “modern” physics (or indeed nearly any
upper-level course); or in specialized courses on the physicsof energy or environment.
1Even students who will later pur-
sue detailed analysis can beneﬁt from exploring models thatare simple enough to expose mechanisms, and they may ﬁnd
the graphical reasoning here to be a useful guidepost (anduseful when discussing with non-physicists). Students willalso recognize that similar considerations also apply toexoplanets.
2
The main points to be made here are available in more
technical publications, for example, Ref. 3; the goal of the
present article is to present them in a brief format. Featuresthat are unusual for treatments at this level include discus-sion of the role of convection via graphical arguments (anddimensional analysis), as well as some observational datathat are not usually shown. I also discuss how to avert poten-tial confusion by spotlighting the simple mathematical factthathg/C14fi6¼gðhfiÞifgis a nonlinear function (Sec. VB,
presented graphically in Fig. 7and applied in Fig. 8).Finally, Sec. Vaddresses the motivating questions (1) above
with a discussion of complex molecular spectra, leading up
to a semiquantitative exercise for students. Many other
important topics are omitted for brevity, including detailed
radiative transport, full 3D modeling, the effects of oceans,
cloud feedback, and so on. Interested readers will ﬁnd some
of these omissions rectiﬁed in intermediate-level books
4–9
and articles10–15and references therein.
Suggested answers to queries (1) above appear in the
Conclusion.
II. BACKGROUND
Here we brieﬂy summarize some material from the
Physics curriculum. Thermal radiation can be emitted evenby a body that is not “black,” which can be characterized by
a wavelength-dependent emissivity factor EðkÞ, equal to 1
for a perfectly absorbing body (Kirchhoff law). If the emis-
sivity is roughly constant over the wavelength range where
emission is nonnegligible, then the body’s total irradiance
(energy emitted per area of surface) is given by the
Stefan–Boltzmann law,
irradiance ¼Er
SBT4; (2)
where rSB¼p2kB4=ð60/C22h3c2Þ/C255:7/C210/C08Wm/C02K/C04is
the Stefan–Boltzmann constant. That energy ﬂux can be bro-
ken down as a density in wavelength k(a modiﬁed Planck
spectrum),
dðirradiance Þ¼E ð kÞ4p2/C22hc2k/C05ðex/C01Þ/C01dk;
where x¼2p/C22hc=ðkkBTÞ: (3)
A single molecule’s ability to absorb light can be
described by the value of absorption cross-section, an area
that we will call a1. The probability for a photon to be
absorbed by a gas containing such molecules is then given
by the Beer–Lambert–Bouguer rule,
Probðabsorbed Þ¼1/C0e/C0a1ðkÞqb; (4)
where qis the number density of absorbers and bis the path
length. (Section IV C will generalize to the case where qis
not constant.)
The absorption cross-section spectrum for a molecular
species in the gas form generally consists of peaks corre-
sponding to state transition energy differences. Those peaks
721 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 721 04 October 2023 22:56:54
broaden when gas pressure is increased, because molecular
collisions start to become signiﬁcant. Not every possiblestate transition will actually couple strongly to electromag-
netic radiation; those with a nonzero transition dipole
moment have much higher mean rates than those without.Homonuclear, diatomic molecules, such as O
2or N 2, have
no ground-state dipole moment, nor can they acquire one bybending or stretching, so their transitions in the infraredspectrum are decoupled from light. More complex mole-
cules, such as CO
2and H 2O, do have allowed transitions and
are strongly IR-active. (For a lecture demonstration showingIR activity of CO
2gas, see Refs. 16and17.)
III. NAKED PLANETS
We begin by thinking about the temperature of an object
that is heated by a distant source of light, for example, a
planet or moon in our solar system. Each of those objects hasa light and a dark side at any moment, but each is rotating;we will make the rough approximation that each is subjectedto a solar energy infall that is the average of day and night.Incoming light also lands at various angles depending on the
position on the surface: Generally, the angle is more oblique
at the poles than at the equator. We will make the evenrougher approximation of neglecting all these effects, imag-ining that all energy intercepted from the Sun is spread uni-formly over the planet’s surface.
Despite the huge energy infall, Earth’s average surface
temperature is changing only slowly; every watt of incoming
solar energy must get sent back into space. For a mechanical
metaphor, imagine a system with a simple self-regulationmechanism. Water ﬂows into a bucket at a ﬁxed rate. A leakat the bottom of the bucket lets water out at a rate thatdepends on its pressure. The pressure increases with increas-ing depth of water in the bucket. Suppose that the bucket
starts empty. Initially, inﬂow exceeds outﬂow, and the level
rises. Eventually, however, the system arrives at a steadystate, in which its water level sets an exit rate that matchesthe inﬂow. If we increase the inﬂow rate, the system will sta-bilize at a new, higher steady level. If instead we shrink theexit hole, we again ﬁnd that the eventual steady level is
higher than initially.
A ﬁxed radiant energy input to a planet’s surface also
brings it to a steady state, in which its output of thermal radi-ation balances the input. Satellites measure the power radi-ated by the Sun as P
sun/C253:9/C21026W. Most of this energy
disappears into space, missing the planet. Only the fractionðpR
p2Þ=ð4pDp2Þintercepts it, where Rpis the planet’s radius
andDpits distance. Some of the incoming solar energy is
reﬂected, for example, by clouds. We account for this byreducing the solar input by a factor 1 /C0R, where the reﬂec-
tivity (also called “Bond albedo”) Ris a dimensionless num-
ber determined by observation.18We will call this reduced
total input the planet’s net insolation. Per planet surface area,
it is given by19
net insolation ¼ð1/C0R ÞPsun
16pDp2
/C25240 W =m2for Earth : (5)
Table Igives some values for RandDp.20
The planet’s temperature must rise until its thermal emis-
sion matches the net insolation, similarly to the stabilizingmechanism in the “bucket” metaphor earlier in this section.
For a planet with little or no atmosphere (“naked planet”),the emission rate is Er
SBTsurf4. Because the incoming energy
ﬂow is reduced by the factors in Eq. (5), the predicted sur-
face temperature Tsurfis far lower than Tsun. In fact, all three
of the planets that we are considering arrive at steady-state
temperatures for which they emit most of their energy in the
mid-infrared wavelength range ( k¼10–20 lm). In this
range, their emissivities are /C25100%.21The fourth column of
the table shows the predictions from this model.
Our oversimpliﬁed approach has fortuitously done well at
predicting the mean surface temperature of Mars. However,the other two planets are failures: For Earth, our estimate of
mean surface temperature is below the freezing point of
water.
22Venus, with its higher reﬂectivity, was predicted to
be even colder, and yet its actual surface temperature is hot
enough to melt lead! Thus, we have missed something big;
however, Sec. IVwill show that the overall strategy begun
here can be retained once we acknowledge that missingpiece.
IV. EARTH AND VENUS, DRESSED IN GRAY
We may guess that the predictions in Sec. IIIwere unsuc-
cessful in part because Earth and Venus are both “clothed”
in mixtures of gases. However, it’s puzzling, because
•The dominant air molecules (including N 2,O2, and CO 2)
are all weakly absorbing throughout much of the fre-quency range of the incoming solar radiation (visible and
near-IR). Thus, incoming solar energy really does end up
mainly warming the surface, as we assumed.
•Although water droplets absorb some infrared radiationpresent in the solar spectrum, gravity constrains them to
be near the surface; we can lump this solar absorption
with that of the surface. Water droplets also have a bigeffect on visible light but mainly to reﬂect or otherwise
scatter it; we already accounted for reﬂection.
•Although hard ultraviolet does get absorbed by oxygen, it
is a minor fraction of the total incoming energy ﬂux.
Thus, it may not be obvious what is wrong with the calcu-
lations in Sec. III. In a nutshell, this section will argue that23
•On a clothed planet, the Stefan–Boltzmann law instead
sets the temperature of a high atmospheric layer (the out-
ermost IR-thick layer, Sec. IV A),notthe planet’s surface.
•Temperature rises linearly as we descend below the outer-
most IR-thick layer, with a gradient set by the nature ofconvection (Sec. IV B).
•Thus, the surface temperature depends on the height of the
outermost IR-thick layer, which, in turn, depends on atmo-
spheric composition (Sec. IV D).Table I. Planetary data.
Planet Distance DpReflectivityPredicted
naked-planetObserved
mean surface
(1011m) R Temperature (K) Temperature Tsurf(K)
Earth 1.50 0.31 254 288
Venus 1.08 0.76 230 737Mars 2.3 0.25 210 210
722 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Philip C. Nelson 722 04 October 2023 22:56:54
A. Infrared-active gases impede the loss of solar energy
from a planet’s surface
Figure 1discloses a big omission in the discussion of
Sec. III.25The total energy input to Earth’s surface is actu-
ally dominated by a new source that we have not yet consid-
ered: Our atmosphere itself emits infrared down toward the
surface.
It may seem paradoxical that energy from our atmosphere,
whose ultimate origin is the Sun, should be arriving at a
higher rate than solar energy itself (Fig. 1)! Yet, consider a
vacuum ﬂask designed to keep coffee hot. Suppose thatinstead of a drink, it contains an electric heating element that
constantly delivers energy at some rate P. If the reﬂection
from the inner wall were perfect, the energy input wouldraise the interior temperature without limit. Even with realis-
tic, imperfectly reﬂecting walls, a steady state can develop in
which energy from the outward-directed thermal radiation isreﬂected back into the interior at a rate greater than P. There
is no contradiction with energy conservation, because the hot
interior also emits energy toward the walls at an equallylarge rate (plus P). Similarly, the bottom of Earth’s atmo-
sphere receives IR energy at a constant rate (originating
when the short-wavelength incoming solar radiation heats
the surface), but there is no reason why total upward and
downward energy ﬂuxes should not exceed that rate.
In short, a planetary atmosphere can obstruct the loss of
energy by absorbing some of what is emitted from the sur-
face and emitting new infrared radiation, some of which is
directed back toward the planet (Fig. 2(b)). Some planets,
including Earth and Venus, have atmospheres that are
“optically thick” at mid-infrared wavelengths (that is, a pho-
ton emitted by the surface in this band is likely to beabsorbed in the atmosphere before reaching space). In that
situation, only the outermost IR-thick layer of the atmo-
sphere will be able to emit freely to space. That high layer’s
temperature may be approximately given by an estimate like
the one made in Sec. III(see Eq. (7)), but the planetary sur-
face will in general be warmer.B. The lapse rate characterizes energy transport
in the troposphere
We would like to improve our planetary energy ﬂow cal-
culation by incorporating the effects of infrared-active gases,at least qualitatively. However, immediately we face a difﬁ-
culty: The transport of energy involves a mechanism not
envisioned in the “blanket” model, namely, large-scale
motion of air (3 in Fig. 2(b)).
Fortunately, Fig. 3suggests a simple approach. Both on
Earth and on Venus, the low, densest, part of the atmosphere
shows a strikingly linear dependence of temperature on alti-
tude, despite large changes in density and temperature. Thetemperature gradient is called the lapse rate,
26and the zone
over which it is roughly constant is called the troposphere.
If a planet’s atmosphere contains a signiﬁcant amount of
infrared-active molecules, then its lower layers will be opa-
que to infrared light, and photon emission will not be the
most effective way for energy to ﬂow away from the surface.
Solids and liquids can transfer thermal energy by conduction,
but this process is also not very effective in gases. Instead,
warmer (lower) air will physically exchange places with
cooler (higher) air, a process called convection, becausegases become buoyant when heated.
Convection acts to reduce any temperature gradient, but
only down to a certain point: Once the lapse rate decreases
below a critical value, then an air layer will be stable against
convection.29Thus, we expect a zone throughout which con-
vection has reduced the temperature gradient to that critical
value.
We can estimate the critical lapse rate via a dimensional
argument.30We are seeking a quantity with units K =km. The
combination of relevant constants g=cphas the required
units, where gis the acceleration of gravity at the surface
and cpis the speciﬁc heat at constant pressure, per mass.
What makes this formula so useful is that it is nearly inde-
pendent of gas temperature and density because cpis con-
stant for an ideal gas. For a gas such as dry air that roughly
obeys the ideal gas law, without any component that can
condense upon cooling,31the formula predicts a lapse rate of
about 10 K =km (see the Appendix ).
A similar but more accurate formula can be written to
account for an atmosphere with a condensing component,
such as water vapor on Earth.32The actual observed lapseFig. 1. (Observational data). Origins of infrared radiation arriving at Earth’s
surface. The thin lower curve (blue) shows the spectral irradiance integrated
over all downward directions and over the band 300–2800 nm, whichincludes nearly all light coming directly from the Sun but excludes nearly all
thermal radiation at Earth’s temperature. The day-to-day ﬂuctuations arise
from changes in cloud cover. The heavy upper curve (red) shows the down-
ward irradiance integrated over the band 4500–42 000 nm, which excludes
nearly all light coming directly from the Sun but includes nearly all thermal
radiation at Earth’s surface temperature. (Data courtesy Peter Pilewskie; see
Ref.24.).Fig. 2. Energy transport modes. (a) Solar radiation arrives at a naked planet
(left) and warms the surface, which in turn emits a larger number of lower
energy photons (right). (b) With an atmosphere, some of the outgoing IR
radiation is absorbed by infrared-active gas molecules (circles). Those mole-
cules in turn emit IR, partly back down toward the surface (1). The density
of molecules decreases with height, so outgoing radiation can escape freelyif it is emitted at high enough altitude (2), but the temperature at that altitude
is lower than on the surface. Another energy-transport mechanism is avail-
able as well: the physical movement of molecules (convection), symbolized
by the gray circulation at right (3).
723 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Philip C. Nelson 723 04 October 2023 22:56:54
rate in the troposphere is about 6 :5K=km (Fig. 3(a)).
For Venus, the data again fall roughly on a straight line
(Fig. 3(b)).
C. The outermost IR-thick layer emits energy to space
Now that we have a simpliﬁed picture of convection, let’s
work upward from the planetary surface. Incoming radiationin the visible wavelength range arrives there, and the fraction
that is not reﬂected is absorbed by oceans and/or land, then
reemitted as IR. Section IV B said that in the troposphere,
incoming energy is transported upward with ﬁxed tempera-ture gradient (lapse rate). At some altitude, however, the
remaining atmosphere is so thin that radiation becomes the
dominant energy transport mechanism. This crossover alti-tude controls the surface temperature, so its dependence onatmospheric composition is the next topic to consider.
In more detail, the absorption cross section is a measure of
a molecule’s ability to absorb light of a given frequency. In
this section, we will temporarily suppose that the cross sec-tion is independent of wavelength throughout the infraredregion, a simpliﬁcation sometimes called the gray gas
model.
33A uniform sample of thickness babsorbs a beam of
light by the exponential law (Eq. (4)). More generally, if the
density is nonuniform we replace a1qbin Eq. (4)by the opti-
cal depth s¼a1ÐdzqðzÞ. Note that despite the word
“depth,” this quantity is dimensionless.
In a planetary atmosphere, the overall density of gas falls
roughly exponentially with altitude.34The density of a well-
mixed chemical species such as CO 2then also fallsexponentially: qðzÞ¼q0e/C0z=H, where q0is the density at the
surface and His a constant called the scale height (Fig. 4(a)).
We are interested in the optical depth from a given zto inﬁn-
ity, because this quantity describes how much the atmo-sphere impedes the escape of photons,
s
1ðzÞ¼a1ð1
zdz0q0e/C0z0=H¼a1q0He/C0z=H: (6)
Thus, the optical depth to inﬁnity is also exponential in form
(Fig. 4(b)).
We loosely deﬁne the outermost IR-thick layer of the
atmosphere by the altitude zlastat which IR optical depth
to inﬁnity falls to some critical value, for example, 1, corre-sponding to absorption of less than 1 /C0e
/C01/C2563%. We also
simplify by assuming that35
•Everything below zlasttransports energy outward with
ﬁxed lapse rate (the tropopause is always at least as high
aszlast).
•Everything beyond zlastradiates energy to space, following
Eq.(2).
Although the assumptions just made are crude, they do
incorporate the key insight of the preceding discussion: For
a clothed planet, the estimate of surface temperature in Sec.
IIIfailed because it should have been applied to the outer-
most IR-thick layer, not to the surface. LetTlastdenote the
temperature of the outermost IR-thick layer. Energy arrives
at that layer from below at a total rate per area equal to the
net insolation (absorbed solar input, Eq. (5)). The layer emitsFig. 3. (Observational data). Atmospheric temperature proﬁles. (a) Temperature proﬁles for Earth measured at mid-latitudes. Summer is warmer than winter,
but all seasons have a similar lapse rate. Above 30 km, the temperature increases, but this has little relevance for climate, because most of the atmosp here lies
in the troposphere. (b) Temperature proﬁle for Venus. The two symbols show data from two different probes descending near the equator. The tropopause is at
much higher altitude than on Earth. Data from: (a) Ref. 27and (b) Ref. 28.
Fig. 4. Effects of increasing density of a component gas. (a) Exponentials representing number density qðzÞof a well-mixed molecular species (arbitrary units)
as a function of altitude z. Two different values of q0, the density at the surface, are shown. (b) Corresponding optical depths from zto inﬁnity (Eq. (6)). A crit-
ical value, such as 1, is achieved at different altitudes zlastdepending on q0. (For a condensing species such as water vapor, the density proﬁle is different, but
still there will be a zlast.)
724 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Philip C. Nelson 724 04 October 2023 22:56:54
infrared radiation outward from its top, with total rate per
area given by the Stefan–Boltzmann law. Its emissivity is
/C251 because by assumption it is IR-opaque. Higher levels,
however, were assumed to be weakly absorbing and, hence,also weakly emitting by Kirchhoff’s law, so they have negli-gible effect on outgoing energy. Thus,
36
net insolation ¼ð1/C0R Þ¼ rSBTlast4; (7)
which determines Tlast.
D. A graphical argument shows the effects of changing
atmospheric composition or reflectivity
Equation (7)can now be combined with the lapse rate to
predict qualitatively the temperature at the surface, once weknow the altitude z
lastof the outermost IR-thick layer.
Increasing the amount of infrared-active gases (for example,in the aftermath of a massive volcano eruption or as a result
of industrial activity) raises the outermost IR-thick layer
(Fig. 4(b)) and so increases the surface temperature (Fig.
5(a)).37An increase in net insolation, for example, by a
reduction of averaged reﬂectivity after the loss of polar ice,also warms the surface by a different route (Fig. 5(b)).
We now see the cause of the very high surface temperature
on Venus: Its atmosphere is 96% carbon dioxide, a stronglyinfrared-active gas compared to Earth’s oxygen and nitrogen.Moreover, Venus has much more atmosphere than Earth: Its
surface pressure is 92 times as great as ours. For both of
these reasons, its atmosphere remains opaque to infrared
photons even up to high altitudes, leading to a much higheroutermost IR-thick layer than on Earth, and a correspond-
ingly high surface temperature.
V. BEYOND THE GRAY GAS MODEL
A. Molecular IR absorption spectra are complex
Section IV C introduced the concept of the outermost IR-
thick atmospheric layer by integrating the absorption cross
section from altitude zout to inﬁnity (Eq. (6)) and deﬁning
z
lastas the altitude below which a particular threshold value
is exceeded. Our discussion assumed that the cross section
was independent of wavelength (the “gray gas model”), but
Fig.6shows this to be far from true. Nor is this a peculiarity
of carbon dioxide: All IR-active gases have complex absorp-tion spectra.
Optical depth depends on the absorption cross section,
so it, too, will be different for different wavelengths. In
particular, each wavelength has its own separate value forthe altitude z
lastðkÞof its outermost IR-thick layer. We
next outline how this fact affects planetary climate
calculations.
B. Absorption windows depend on the density
of IR-active gases
The complexity of absorption spectra may tempt us to
simplify by replacing them with average values, and feedingthe result into a gray-gas model. However, we must do better
than that. To see why, recall that if gis a nonlinear function,Fig. 5. Effects of changes to atmospheric composition or surface reﬂectivity on surface temperature. (a) A change in atmospheric composition, with n o change
in reﬂectivity, can raise surface temperature by moving the outermost IR-thick layer upward (Fig. 4(b)). (b) A decrease in reﬂectivity, with no change in com-
position, can raise surface temperature by increasing the net insolation and therefore Tlast.
Fig. 6. IR absorption spectrum of CO 2. (a) (Experimental data) Detail of the absorption cross section a1at sea-level pressure and density, as a function of
wavelength, showing complex substructure. (b) (Calculation from data) Absorption of a sample of pure CO 2with depth 1 mm. The graph was obtained by
evaluating Eq. (4)with the data in (a). (Data generated from the HITRAN2016 database by the Reference Forward Model, kindly supplied by David Romps;
see Refs. 38and39.)
725 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Philip C. Nelson 725 04 October 2023 22:56:54
then the average of gðfðkÞÞover a range of kis different
from gevaluated at the average of f.
Figure 7shows an extreme example, which nevertheless is
relevant for our problem. Here, we imagine a “clippingfunction” gthat equals zero for values below a threshold and
equals one for values above it. When two very similar-looking functions, with very similar average values, are fedinto g, the results are quite different, and in particular, they
have quite different average values. Although our opticalabsorption function 1 /C0e
/C0sis not literally a clipping func-
tion, it does have a similar effect, transitioning from 0 to 1over a limited range of svalues.
Figure 8shows the result of applying the absorption
function to the carbon dioxide spectrum. Because opti-cal depth depends on density as well as on cross-section, two different scenarios are shown: The ﬁrst is areal historical moment, whereas the second is a possiblefuture situation. Both scenarios agree that there is aband of total absorption, but they differ in its effectivewidth. We can now explore the implications of thisobservation for climate.C. Narrowing an absorption window also increases
surface temperature
We can summarize the message of Fig. 8by saying that
the contribution of carbon dioxide gas to atmospheric IRabsorption consists of absorption bands separated by“windows.” Even when we add in the other relevant IR-active atmospheric constituents (mainly water vapor), westill ﬁnd windows in which the entire atmosphere is nearlytransparent, for example, the range 11–12 lm. In this range,
there is novalue z
lastðkÞsatisfying s1ðzlast;kÞ>1; that is,
the altitude of the “last” IR-thick layer is zero.
In such windows, thermal radiation at Earth’s surface tem-
perature streams freely away to space, unlike the scenario inSec. IV C.41Moreover, because emissivity is equal to
absorptivity (Kirchhoff’s law, Sec. II), in those windows no
additional IR radiation from the atmosphere joins the outgo-ing surface photons. In these bands, an extraterrestrialobserver thus sees thermal radiation at the surface tempera-ture. Indeed, region 1 in Fig. 9shows such behavior.
Our problem may seem far more complicated than in
the gray gas model, but recall that at any altitude in thetroposphere, all wavelength bands share a common temper-
ature set by the lapse rate and a single number, the surface
temperature. Imagine subdividing the spectrum intowavelength slices and rank-ordering them in increasingorder of z
last:
•For the absorption windows (bands with zlastðkÞ¼0), the
discussion in Sec. IIIis valid. In these windows, the ﬂux
of energy is of Planck form, at the surface temperatureT
surf(region 1 in Fig. 9).
•The bands with the next lowest value of zlastðkÞalso emit
photons with the Planck spectrum, but with a temperatureTðz
lastðkÞÞthat is lower than TsurfbyzlastðkÞtimes the lapse
rate (region 2 in Fig. 9).
•The bands with the next higher value of zlastðkÞare emitted
from still cooler layers (region 3 in Fig. 9), and so on.
The value of Tsurfis now determined by the requirement
that the sum of all the outward energy ﬂows must balancethe net insolation, just as with a naked planet (Sec. III). As in
the simpler gray gas model (Sec. IV), we again see that theFig. 7. Effect of a nonlinear threshold function. (a) Two functions f1andf2
differ by a slight vertical shift. A threshold function (step function) gwill be
applied to each one at the horizontal dotted level. (b) The ﬁrst function just
barely peeks over the threshold. (c) The small shift greatly inﬂuences the
thresholded result.
Fig. 8. Absorption from surface to inﬁnity. Optical depth was computed by integrating CO 2density from the planetary surface to inﬁnity (Eq. (6)) and multi-
plying by the cross sections; then, total absorption was computed via Eq. (4). Because of the great depth of the atmosphere, features that were scarcely visible
in Fig. 6(b)have large effects. Top: Absorption calculated with the measured atmospheric concentration of CO 2in 1957. Bottom: Hypothetical concentration
twice that in 1957. The signiﬁcant differences are that: (1) The band of total absorption is wider; (2) absorption between peaks is stronger; and (3) ba nds of par-
tial absorption have become more complete.
726 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Philip C. Nelson 726 04 October 2023 22:56:54
effect of the atmosphere is to set a higher surface tempera-
ture than that of the corresponding naked planet.
We can now return to this article’s opening queries (Secs.
IandVI): Let us revisit the question of what happens when
the density of an IR-active gas such as CO 2is raised. For
wavelengths deep within a strong absorption band, the storyis similar to what was said in Sec. IV D:z
lastðkÞincreases, so
the surface temperature must go up in order to emit the
required amount of energy.
However, there is now an additional effect not present ear-
lier. An absorption band will get wider as we increase the
density of an IR-active component, and the spaces betweenits individual peaks will also narrow (Fig. 8). Thus, at the
edges of a band (the “wing” regions
42),zlastwill increase
from zero to some nonzero altitude if the density rises highenough to create an IR-thick layer. The wavelength zones
that are able to impede outgoing IR radiation, thus, enlarge
(windows shrink), and so the quasisteady surface tempera-ture rises faster than would have been predicted by the mech-anism in the preceding paragraph acting alone.
43
Let’s make a quantitative estimate based on the consider-
ations in the preceding paragraph. The observational data inFig.9, and other sources, suggest a rough division of the IR
spectrum into several bands, each radiating to space at a distincttemperature (Table II). The total energy output can be obtained
by integrating Eq. (3)over each band, generalizing Eq. (2),
band contribution ¼
15
p4rSBTband4ðxmax
xminx3dx
ex/C01;
where x¼2p/C22hc
kkBTband:
Substituting the values in the table and carrying out the inte-
grals numerically yields that the total irradiance of all bandsroughly equals the net insolation given in Eq. (5).Now suppose that an increase in CO
2widens the ﬁfth
absorption band in the table at the expense of its neighborsby just 0 :25lm on each side. Then, the energy output goes
down and, hence, out of balance with the input. The system
must respond by raising its surface temperature by anunknown DT
surf. Due to the ﬁxed lapse rate in the tropo-
sphere, the temperature at every altitude also increases bythe same DT
surf(Fig. 5). A good homework problem at this
point is to have students redo the calculation with various
new temperature values and show that DTsurf/C251:3K i s
required to restore energy balance. This contribution to tem-perature change is in addition to the one from raising the alti-tudes of existing outermost IR-thick layers.
This section has amended the gray-gas model while leav-
ing its lessons mainly intact. For many technical details, see
Ref. 10.
D. Pressure broadening also affects the absorption
windows
Section IIIobtained a reasonable answer by treating Mars
as “naked,” but actually, its atmospheric CO
2density is
much larger than Earth’s! To resolve this apparent contradic-tion, we need to appreciate another physically interestingaspect of molecular absorption, that is, pressure broadening(Sec. II). The pressure relevant to this phenomenon is the
total gas pressure,
44not just the part attributable to the IR-
active gas, so it can be signiﬁcant even though the density ofCO
2in Earth’s current atmosphere is very small.
Section VB argued that the “wings” of a molecule’s
absorption spectrum are critical for determining its surface-warming effect. The preceding paragraph argued that those
wings are strongly inﬂuenced by ambient pressure. This
observation helps explain why lots of CO
2on Mars does not
create a large warming effect: Oxygen and nitrogen, themain constituents of Earth’s atmosphere, are largely absenton Mars because its lower surface gravity cannot hold onto
them as well as Earth’s does. Because pressure broadening
from those gases is absent, the CO
2on Mars is less effec-
tive at blocking IR radiation than that on Earth.14Less
warming from CO 2(as well as greater distance to the Sun)
means a cooler planet. Moreover, another greenhouse gas,
H2O, is even lighter than N 2or O 2, so little of it remains in
the Martian atmosphere. All of these reasons combine torender Mars nearly as cold as if it had no atmosphere at all(Sec. III).
E. Positive feedbacks
The increases of z
lastat various wavelengths contribute to
the climate sensitivity (change of temperature in response toFig. 9. (Observational data; mathematical functions) Earth’s emission spec-
trum viewed from space. The dots are data from the Atmospheric Infrared
Sounder probe; for comparison, the curves show thermal radiation spectra atvarious temperatures (Eq. (3)). 1: In an IR-transparent window, z
last¼0 and
energy streams out freely at the surface temperature. 2: In a wavelength
band where water vapor absorbs strongly but CO 2does not, Earth emits at
an effective temperature corresponding to the altitude at which water vapor
condenses out; higher than this, there is very little H 2O. 3: In a wavelength
band where CO 2absorbs strongly but water vapor does not, Earth emits at a
still lower temperature corresponding to zlastin the upper troposphere (data
courtesy Yi Huang; see also Ref. 40).Table II. Black-body temperatures attributed to various wavelengths.
Wavelength band ( lm) Tband(K)
6–8.1 250
8.1–9.4 285
9.4–10 260
10–13 28513–17 22017–29 26029–45 230
727 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Philip C. Nelson 727 04 October 2023 22:56:54
an increase in CO 2). Climate sensitivity is enhanced by
feedback:
•On Earth, warming caused by the two mechanisms just
described drives more water vapor into the atmosphere
from the oceans. Because water vapor is itself IR-active,
its increase leads to still more warming (Fig. 5(a)).
•An increase in mean surface temperature also shrinks the
polar icecaps, in turn reducing average reﬂectivity,increasing net insolation, and leading to further tempera-
ture increase (Fig. 5(b)).
Positive feedback can lead to bistability, so it is critically
important to know how close the Earth system is to a bifur-
cation into a hot state. Conversely, in past epochs, Earth has
gotten stuck in a “snowball” state that was too cold to permitany appreciable water vapor content.
F. A road not (yet) taken on Earth
In contrast to Mars, Venus’s very high atmospheric pressure
makes its CO
2more effective than on Earth.45However, why
is Venus’s atmosphere so different from ours? Earth andVenus have similar size and composition and move in similar
orbits, so it’s reasonable to suppose that they were similar in
other respects when they ﬁrst formed. For example, the total
fraction of carbon (atmospheric plus that bound in rocks) is
probably similar for these two planets (Ref. 46,T a b l e 1). On
Earth, carbon continually cycles between the atmosphere and
the planet’s interior, providing a stabilizing feedback, but part
of this loop seems to have broken on Venus, leaving much of
the carbon in the atmosphere.
One clue is that Venus no longer has any oceans. In light
of that fact, a possible scenario runs as follows. At somepoint, the temperature on Venus rose higher than Earth’s.
That rise evaporated more water from the existing oceans,
leading to the ﬁrst positive feedback outlined in Sec. VE—
in this case, a “runaway” scenario.
7Eventually allsurface
water was in vapor form. Liquid water is needed for thephysical process of weathering rocks, which on Earth slowly
removes atmospheric CO
2and ultimately returns it to the
planet’s interior, so losing liquid water broke that “deep car-bon cycle.”47Meanwhile, volcanic activity continued, add-
ing CO 2from the interior to the atmosphere.
Gradually, solar UV photons broke up atmospheric water
vapor and the light hydrogen escaped to space. The rising
carbon dioxide level then took over the role of impeding
infrared energy loss from the lost water vapor. Evidence forthis scenario comes from the ratio of deuterium (D) to ordi-
nary hydrogen (H), which is 150 times larger on Venus than
on Earth or other solar-system objects: DH molecules, which
are heavier than ordinary H
2, got left behind (fractionated)
when the hydrogen escaped.48
The foregoing scenario is based on known processes, but
it is still speculative. What is not in dispute is that however
Venus arrived at its current atmosphere, it is now stuck in a
permanently hot state.
VI. CONCLUSION
Planetary climates are determined in part by a chain of
energy transformations: Incoming light, primarily in the visi-ble range, converts its energy to thermal motion of Earth’s
surface materials. That energy exits back into space by the
net effect of convection and atmospheric absorption andemission, ultimately as radiation in a wavelength band dif-
ferent from the one that dominated the incoming light.
Details of the matter/light interaction, which is inherently
quantum mechanical in character, determine the different
effects of various gases, with huge implications for life.
To summarize the limited discussion of this article, here
are replies to the queries in the Introduction (see also Secs.VCandVE):
•CO 2absorbs in a wavelength band where H 2O does not.
Moreover, warming from CO 2increase does indirectly
affect H 2O vapor.
•The wings of each individual peak become important as
CO 2concentration increases. The lower peaks themselves
also begin to matter. Moreover, even in the gray gasmodel, and even at wavelengths where the atmosphere is
opaque, what matters is how high up it remains opaque,
which does change with additional CO
2.
The discussion in this article was not detailed enough to
make quantitative predictions of climate sensitivity. We
have neglected lateral air ﬂows and the effects of continents
and oceans;49–53we used a shortcut instead of solving the
radiative-convective equations; we neglected the reduction
of pressure broadening in the upper atmosphere, cloud feed-back, plant transpiration; and so on. Nevertheless, it should
now be understandable why more complete calculations pre-
dict that doubling CO
2relative to preindustrial times will
increase Earth’s temperature signiﬁcantly.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank Craig Bohren, Kevin Y.
Chen, Eugene Clothiaux, Nicolas Cowan, Yi Huang,
Andrew Ingersoll, Peter Pilewskie, and David Romps for
correspondence and/or data. The author was also grateful to
the anonymous referees for suggesting many improvements,
large and small. This work was partly performed whilevisiting the Aspen Center for Physics, which was supported
by NSF Grant No. PHY-2210452.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂicts to disclose.
APPENDIX: THE LAPSE RATE
Here are details about the ideal-gas lapse rate. To get degrees
Kelvin in the numerator, we need the factor ðspecific heat Þ/C01.
To eliminate seconds, we then need the acceleration of gravity.
Then, we already have the desired units; there is no room for
any additional factors such as mass density. Each parcel of air
is free to expand at the ambient pressure, so the relevant spe-ciﬁc heat is at constant pressure. These considerations lead to
the formula g=c
pproposed in Sec. IV B.
Earth’s atmosphere is mostly nitrogen. Nitrogen is a
diatomic molecule with molar mass 28 kg/mole, so in the
ideal gas limit, the speciﬁc heat per mass is
cp¼7
21
0:028 kg =mole/C18/C198:3J
mole K/C18/C19
/C251000 J =ðkg KÞ:
Then g=cp¼9:8ms/C02=ð1000 J =ðkg KÞÞ /C25 10 km/C01Ka ss t a t e d
in the main text.
728 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Philip C. Nelson 728 04 October 2023 22:56:54
The atmosphere of Venus as mostly CO 2, another linear
molecule but with molar mass 44 kg/mole. Thus, we have
cp¼7
21
0:044 kg =mole/C18/C198:3J
mole K/C18/C19
/C25660 J =ðkg KÞ:
The surface gravity of Venus is about 9 m s/C02,s o g=cp
¼9ms/C02=ð660 J =ðkg KÞÞ /C25 14 km/C01K. Although the atmo-
sphere is not a very ideal gas at the surface pressure ofVenus, nevertheless this ﬁgure is not too far from the inverse
slope /C258k m
/C01K that we read off from Fig. 3.
More importantly than the numerical values, the discus-
sion in the main text rested on the empirical observation thatthe lapse rates on both Earth and Venus are roughly constant
in the troposphere.
a)Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the envi-
ronment, sustainability, and climate change.
b)ORCID: 0000-0002-1782-3076.
1The author has covered this material in one week (three hours of lecture)immediately following a discussion of thermal radiation and its Planckspectrum.
2R. T. Pierrehumbert, Planetary Systems: A Very Short Introduction
(Oxford U.P., Oxford, 2021).
3R. T. Pierrehumbert, Principles of Planetary Climate (Cambridge U.P.,
Cambridge, 2010).
4T Schneider, “Physics of Earth’s climate,” (2019). <http://climate-dynam-
ics.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Climate_Book.pdf >
5R. Wolfson, Energy, Environment, and Climate , 3rd ed. (W.W. Norton
and Co., New York, 2018).
6R. L. Jaffe and W. Taylor, The Physics of Energy (Cambridge U.P.,
Cambridge, 2018).
7A. P. Ingersoll, Planetary Climates (Princeton U.P., Princeton, NJ, 2013).
8F. W. Taylor, Planetary Atmospheres (Oxford U.P., Oxford, 2010).
9F. W. Taylor, Elementary Climate Physics (Oxford U.P., Oxford, 2005).
10J.-L. Dufresne, V. Eymet, C. Crevoisier, and J.-Y. Grandpeix,
“Greenhouse effect: The relative contributions of emission height and total
absorption,” J. Clim. 33(9), 3827–3844 (2020).
11S. E. Schwartz, “Resource letter GECC-1: The greenhouse effect and cli-
mate change: Earth’s natural greenhouse effect,” Am. J. Phys. 86(8),
565–576 (2018).
12S. E. Schwartz, “Resource letter GECC-2: The greenhouse effect and cli-
mate change: The intensiﬁed greenhouse effect,” Am. J. Phys. 86(9),
645–656 (2018).
13Y. Huang and M. B. Shahabadi, “Why logarithmic? A note on thedependence of radiative forcing on gas concentration,” J. Geophys. Res.:
Atmos. 119(24), 13683–13689, https://doi.org/10.1002/2014JD022466
(2014).
14R. T. Pierrehumbert, “Infrared radiation and planetary temperature,” Phys.
Today 64(1), 33–37 (2011).
15A. Tomizuka, “Estimation of the power of greenhouse gases on the basis
of absorption spectra,” Am. J. Phys. 78(4), 359–366 (2010).
16P. G. Sieg, W. Berner, P. K. Harnish, and P. C. Nelson, “A demonstration of
the infrared activity of carbon dioxide,” Phys. Teach. 57(4), 246–249 (2019).
17See <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0eI9zxZoipA >for this class-
room demonstration.
18In the case of Earth, there are also reﬂective polar icecaps, aerosols, and so
on. Although we are not yet including the effects of atmosphere, we have
incorporated such reﬂection in the data of the table via the Rvalues.
Speciﬁcally, Ris the reﬂectivity averaged over the frequency range typi-
cal of the solar spectrum.
19Each planet (and even some moons) also has internal energy production(geothermal energy), but this source is negligibly small for the three wehave chosen to study (Ref. 4, Sec. 2.5).
20The table lists distance values computed simply as the average of the clos-
est and farthest points on each planet’s orbit.
21Perhaps surprisingly, even snow and ice have high IR absorptivity and,hence, also high emissivity.
22Note that if Earth were literally stripped of atmosphere, then its reﬂectiv-ity, currently dominated by clouds, would change, affecting the prediction.The point of the estimate made here is simply the inadequacy of neglecting
absorption in the atmosphere.
23The outlines of this story were already clear in the 19th century, shortlyafter W. Herschel’s discovery of IR radiation. J. Fourier understood the
role of energy balance between incoming short-wavelength and outgoingIR radiation in 1827, as well as the potential role of the atmosphere. J.
Tyndall then measured the absorption spectra of many gases and correctly
identiﬁed carbon dioxide and water vapor as critical for climate in 1863.At the very end of the century, S. Arrhenius constructed a simpliﬁed, but
self-consistent model based in part on Tyndall’s data. Modern discussions
can be found in Refs. 3,13, and 10.
24P. Pilewskie, “An integrated approach for developing concepts in radiation,
energy balance and climate,” 97th American Meteorological Society Annual
Meeting, 26th Symposium on Education , Seattle, WA, January, 2017.
<https://ams.confex.com/ams/97Annual/webprogram/Paper309519.html >
25For an undergraduate laboratory measurement, see Ref. 54.
26This quantity is not a “rate” in the sense of change per time. Rather, it is a
spatial gradient .
27K. Stamnes, G. E. Thomas, and J. J. Stamnes, Radiative Transfer in the
Atmosphere and Ocean , 2nd ed. (Cambridge U.P., Cambridge, 2017).
28A. Seiff, “Thermal structure of the atmosphere of venus,” in Venus , edited
by D. M. Hunten, L. Colin, T. M. Donahue, and V. I. Moroz (Univ.
Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, 1983), Chap. 11, pp. 215–279.
29Rising warm air expands and, hence, cools, losing its buoyancy, so there isa minimal value for the gradient before convection turns on.
30For a more detailed derivation, see Ref. 6, §34.2.2. Reference 3, p. 150
gives another detailed derivation, concluding Tsurf=Tlast¼ðpsurf=plastÞR=cp,
where Ris the gas constant and cp;molis the speciﬁc heat at constant pres-
sure, per mole. Substituting the exponential dependence of pressure with
altitude, Taylor expanding the exponential and keeping up to linear orderrecovers the linear relation in the main text.
31A convecting region of atmosphere with the critical lapse rate is also saidto follow the “dry adiabat.”
32For details, see Ref. 3. S. Manabe shared a Nobel Prize in 2021 in part for
early work on radiative transport, on the role of convection, and on incor-porating the effects of water condensation into a climate model.
33Section Vwill improve upon this simpliﬁcation. We continue to assume
that absorption cross section is negligibly small in the visible range.
34Reference 15gives an improved formula, which, however, is numerically
close to the exponential for Earth’s troposphere.
35We are avoiding a full radiative transport treatment; for that, see Ref. 27.
36See Refs. 3and9.Tlastis sometimes called the “emitting” temperature, in
contrast with a lower “skin” temperature.
37Changing the amount of a noncondensing trace molecule, such as carbondioxide in Earth’s atmosphere, makes a negligible change in the speciﬁc
heat and, hence, in the critical lapse rate.
38D. M. Romps, J. T. Seeley, and J. P. Edman, “Why the forcing from car-
bon dioxide scales as the logarithm of its concentration,” J. Clim. 35(13),
4027–4047 (2022).
39A. Dudhia, “The reference forward model (RFM),” J. Quant. Spectrosc.
Radiative Transfer 186, 243–253 (2017).
40Y. Huang, V. Ramaswamy, X. Huang, Q. Fu, and C. Bardeen, “A strict
test in climate modeling with spectrally resolved radiances: GCM simula-tion versus AIRS observations,” Geophys. Res. Lett. 34(24), 1–6, https://
doi.org/10.1029/2007GL031409 (2007).
41Some students will be interested to hear that this “decoupling” phenome-non is analogous to the epoch of recombination in the early Universe, after
which thermal photons go out of equilibrium with matter.
42M. G. Mlynczak, T. S. Daniels, D. P. Kratz, D. R. Feldman, W. D. Collins,
E. J. Mlawer, M. J. Alvarado, J. E. Lawler, L. W. Anderson, D. W. Fahey,
L. A. Hunt, and J. C. Mast, “The spectroscopic foundation of radiativeforcing of climate by carbon dioxide,” Geophys. Res. Lett. 43(10),
5318–5325, https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL068837 (2016).
43The addition of gases not naturally present in the atmosphere, such aschloroﬂuorocarbons, can also create entirely new absorption bands in what
was previously a window region.
44Thus, the spectral properties of greenhouse gases change with altitude,another complication that must be addressed in a full treatment. Indeed, onother planets with extremely high pressures, even O
2and N 2become IR-
active.
45Although carbon dioxide has a window of IR transparency, droplets of sul-
furic acid forming clouds over Venus trap emission even in that spectral
region.
729 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Philip C. Nelson 729 04 October 2023 22:56:54
46A. P. Ingersoll, “Three eras of planetary exploration,” Nat. Astron. 1(1),
0010 (2017).
47Confusingly, there are at least two different processes referred to as“weathering.” Here, we mean the conversion of silicate rocks via the Ureyreaction (Ref. 2). On Earth, photosynthesis by marine organisms also
removes CO
2from air; they eventually fall to the bottom of the ocean, car-
rying their ﬁxed carbon into sediments that ultimately reenter Earth’s
crust, another part of the carbon cycle that relies on liquid water (and mild
temperatures). (Terrestrial plants are much less effective; much of their
carbon is released back to the atmosphere after they die and decompose.)
48The remaining free oxygen may, in turn, have been removed from the
atmosphere, for example, by oxidizing crustal elements such as iron.
Earth, too, had very little free oxygen prior to the rise of photosynthetic
organisms.
49N. Jeevanjee, J. T. Seeley, D. Paynter, and S. Fueglistaler, “An analyticalmodel for spatially varying clear-sky CO
2forcing,” J. Clim. 34,
9463–9480 (2021).50Y. Huang, Y. Xia, and X. Tan, “On the pattern of CO 2radiative forcing
and poleward energy transport,” J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos. 122(20),
10578–10593, https://doi.org/10.1002/2017JD027221 (2017).
51Y. Huang, X. Tan, and Y. Xia, “Inhomogeneous radiative forcing of
homogeneous greenhouse gases,” J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos. 121(6),
2780–2789, https://doi.org/10.1002/2015JD024569 (2016).
52T. M. Merlis, “Direct weakening of tropical circulations from masked CO 2
radiative forcing,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112(43), 13167–13171
(2015).
53Y. Huang and M. Zhang, “The implication of radiative forcing and feed-back for meridional energy transport,” Geophys. Res. Lett. 41(5),
1665–1672, https://doi.org/10.1002/2013GL059079 (2014).
54G. T. Blanchard, F. A. Adesina, W. C. Belkwell, J. R. Dyess, V. A.Frabbiele, C. McGibboney, and R. D. Rumsey, “Balloon-borne
two-channel infrared spectral photometer for observation of atmospheric
greenhouse effect by undergraduates,” Am. J. Phys. 90(4), 256–262
(2022).
730 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Philip C. Nelson 730 04 October 2023 22:56:54
