
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| APRIL 01 2023
Electromagnetic induction: How the “flux rule” has
superseded Maxwell's general law 
Giuseppe Giuliani
Am. J. Phys.  91, 278–287 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0138144
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Resilient Communities: From Sustainable to Secure
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 2009)
Multiswarm PSO with supersized swarms - Initial performance study
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2016)
Supersizing Stars 04 October 2023 22:51:15
Electromagnetic induction: How the “flux rule” has superseded
Maxwell’s general law
Giuseppe Giuliania)
Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit /C18a di Pavia, Via Bassi 6, 27100 Pavia, Italy
(Received 30 May 2021; accepted 10 December 2022)
As documented by textbooks, the teaching of electromagnetic induction in university and high school
courses is primarily based on what Feynman labeled as the “ﬂux rule,” downgrading it from the statusof physical law. However, Maxwell derived a “general law of electromagnetic induction” in which the
vector potential plays a fundamental role. A modern reformulation of Maxwell’s law can be easily
obtained by deﬁning the induced electromotive force asÞ
lð~Eþ~vc/C2~BÞ/C1~dl,w h e r e ~vcis the velocity
of the positive charges which, by convention, are the current carriers. Maxwell did not possess a
model for the electric current. Therefore, in his law, he took ~vcto be the velocity of the circuit element
containing the charges. This paper aims to show that the modern reformulation of Maxwell’s lawgoverns electromagnetic induction, and the “ﬂux rule” is not a physical law but only a calculation
shortcut that does not always yield the correct predictions. This paper also tries to understand why
Maxwell’s law has been ignored, and how the “ﬂux rule” has taken root. Finally, a section isdedicated to teaching this modern reformulation of Maxwell’s law in high schools and elementary
physics courses.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0138144
I. INTRODUCTION
Electromagnetic induction was discovered by Michael
Faraday in 1831, about ten years after Christian Ørsted
showed that electric currents create magnetic effects. Faraday
induced currents in a closed conducting loop either by switch-
ing on and off the current in a nearby circuit (volta-electric-induction) or by moving the conducting loop towards or away
from a magnet (magneto-electric-induction).1In textbooks or
classrooms, these experiments are usually the starting point
for a discussion about electromagnetic induction.
Many physicists tackled the problem experimentally and
theoretically in the years following Faraday’s discovery. On
the experimental side, it was not so easy to add novel knowl-
edge to what Faraday had already discovered. An exceptionwas the rule found by Emil Lenz in 1834: the induced cur-
rent opposes the phenomenon that generated it.2
We must wait for Maxwell’s Treatise in 1873 to ﬁnd a gen-
eral law of electromagnetic induction, derived within a ﬁeld
description and by treating the currents with a Lagrangian for-
malism (Ref. 3, pp. 207–211). The amazing feature of this law
is that it was obtained without knowing what an electric cur-
rent is, apart from recognizing that it is a “kinetic process.”
Realizing that an electric current arises from moving
charges, we can reformulate Maxwell’s general law as an
integral around a closed curve l,
E¼þ
l/C0@~A
@tþ~vc/C2~B/C18/C19
/C1~dl; (1)
where ~Bis the external magnetic ﬁeld to which the circuit is
exposed, ~Ais the corresponding vector potential, and ~vcis
the velocity of the positive charges that, by convention, are
the current carriers. Maxwell did not possess a model for the
electric current. Therefore, in his law, he took ~vcto be the
velocity of the circuit element containing the charges.
Maxwell’s law fell rapidly into oblivion; meanwhile, the
“ﬂux rule” took root. The “ﬂux rule” states that the induced
electromotive force ( emf)Eis given byE¼/C0d
dtð
S~B/C1^nd S¼/C0dU
dt; (2)
where Uis the magnetic ﬂux and ^nis the unit vector normal to
the integration surface element dS. There is no constraint on S,
except that it is bounded by the conducting circuit. Maxwellenunciated this rule about 50 pages before the formulation ofthe general law and, regrettably, did not comment on the rela-tionship between the two (Ref. 3,p .1 6 7 ) .T h i sf a c tm a yh a v e
contributed to the oblivion of Maxwell’s law (Sec. VI).
Thereby nowadays, with few exceptions, textbooks for uni-
versity and high school students consider the “ﬂux rule” to bethe law of electromagnetic induction, even though, startingwith Feynman’s Lectures , this view has been challenged.
4
This paper aims to prove that the modern formulation of
Maxwell’s general law (Eq. (1)) explains all known experi-
ments on electromagnetic induction. Furthermore, it exam-
ines why the “ﬂux rule” has superseded Maxwell’s law. It is
organized as follows: Sec. IIshows how Maxwell derived
his law. Section IIIrecalls how Maxwell’s law can be refor-
mulated within Maxwell–Lorentz–Einstein electromagne-tism to include our modern knowledge of the nature ofelectric currents. Section IVdeals with the localization of
the induced emf. Section Vshows why the “ﬂux rule” is not
a physical law but a calculation shortcut. Section VItries to
understand how and why Maxwell’s general law has beenneglected and how the “ﬂux rule” has taken root. Finally, inthe last section, we discuss the issue of how to introduce thevector potential and the modern reformulation of Maxwell’sgeneral law in elementary physics courses.
II. MAXWELL AND THE ELECTROMAGNETIC
INDUCTION
In this section, we shall discuss Maxwell’s approach to elec-
tromagnetic induction, which he developed in the second vol-
ume of his Treatise . Unless otherwise stated, the symbols used
to denote physical quantities are the modern ones. In the intro-ductory and descriptive part dedicated to electromagnetic
278 Am. J. Phys. 91(4), April 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 278 04 October 2023 22:51:15
induction (Ref. 3, pp. 163–167), Maxwell enunciated the “ﬂux
rule,” without formally writing the corresponding equation(Ref. 3, p. 167). Maxwell did not possess a microscopic model
of the electric current: the corpuscular and discrete nature of theelectric charge was determined in the late nineteenth century,
after the discovery of the electron by Joseph John Thomson
(1897). Hence, Maxwell only observed that “The electric cur-rent cannot be conceived except as a kinetic phenomenon” and,consequently, that “all that we assume here is that the electriccurrent involves motion of some kind” (Ref. 3, pp. 196–197).
The simple idea that current is a kinetic phenomenon
allowed Maxwell to treat electric circuits with theLagrangian formalism and to use a mechanical analogy.Considering a system of two ﬁliform (meaning “threadlike,”
or one-dimensional) circuits, he wrote that the kinetic energy
of the system due to the current ﬂowing through them—i.e.,itselectrokinetic energy —is given by (Ref. 3, p. 207)
T¼
1
2L1_y12þ1
2L2_y22þM12_y1_y2; (3)
where _y1and _y2are the currents in the circuits. In L1,L2, and
M12we recognize, as Maxwell did, the self-inductances of
the two circuits and their mutual inductance. Then, the elec-
trokinetic momentum of, for instance, circuit ]2 is given by
p2¼dT
d_y2¼L2_y2þM12_y1: (4)
Maxwell then ﬁrst considered the situation where there is
only a single conducting ﬁliform loop of resistance Rthat, at
the instant t¼0, is connected to the poles of a battery (whose
emfisE) and wrote
E¼ R_yþdp
dt; (5)
which, in modern notation, reads (as we teach our students)
E¼ RiþLdi
dt; (6)
where /C0Ldi=dtis the self-induced emfin the circuit.
Maxwell’s commented (Ref. 3, pp. 208–209):
The impressed electromotive force Eis therefore
the sum of two parts. The first, R_y, is required to
maintain the current _yagainst the resistance R.
The second part is required to increase the
electromagnetic momentum p. This is the
electromotive force which must be supplied fromsources independent of magneto-electric induction.The electromotive-force arising from magneto-electric induction alone is evidently /C0dp=dt, or,
the rate of decrease of the electrokinetic momen-tum of the circuit [original italics].
Since p¼Þ~A/C1~dl(Ref. 3, p. 215), we ﬁnally get
E¼/C0
dp
dt¼/C0d
dtþ
l~A/C1~dl; (7)
where Ehas the dimensions of an electric potential, as it
should.
Equation (7)is also valid in the case of two or more cir-
cuits, as it can be veriﬁed. In a section entitled Exploration
of the ﬁeld by means of the secondary circuit (Ref. 3,p. 212), Maxwell treated in detail the case of two circuits.
Maxwell begun by recalling that, on the basis of Eq. (4), the
electrokinetic momentum of the secondary circuit consists oftwo parts. The interaction part is given by
p
2¼Mi1;M12¼M21¼M: (8)
Maxwell considered only the effect of the circuit ]1 on cir-
cuit ]2 and ignored the self-induction of circuit ]2. Under the
assumptions that the primary circuit (circuit ]1) is ﬁxed, and
its current i 1is constant , the electrokinetic momentum of the
secondary circuit depends only—through the mutual induc-tance M—on its form and position. Hence (Ref. 3, p. 216),
p
2¼þ
l2~A1/C1~dl2¼þ
S2~B1/C1^nd S 2; (9)
where ~A1and ~B1are the vector potential and the magnetic
ﬁeld created by the ﬁrst circuit, respectively. Now, if the sec-
ondary circuit is at rest, by combining Eqs. (7)and(9),w e
get the “ﬂux rule” (2).
However, Maxwell did not make this step. Instead, Eq. (7)
is the starting point to obtain the General Equations of the
Electromotive Force (Ref. 3, p. 220). For this, Maxwell con-
sidered the secondary circuit to be in motion with a velocity
that can depend on each circuit element, which means that
the circuit may change form. The emfinduced in the second-
ary circuit is given by
E2¼/C0dp2
dt¼/C0d
dtþ
l2~A1ð~r;tÞ/C1~dl2: (10)
We have introduced the subscripts for clarity: Maxwell did
not use them. Maxwell outlined only the main passages ofthe ensuing calculation; a recent, detailed derivation can be
found in Ref. 5. It turns out that (in modern notation)
E
2¼/C0dp2
dt¼þ
l2ð~v2/C2~B1Þ/C0@~A1
@t/C0ru/C20/C21
/C1~dl2;(11)
where ~v2is the velocity of the circuit element dl2anduis
the electric potential at the same circuit element. We have
leftuwithout subscript because its values at the points of
circuit ]2 depend both on circuit ]1—through the current
induced in circuit ]2—and on the circuit ]2 through its elec-
tric resistance.
In this calculation, the magnetic ﬁeld ~B1comes into play
through the relationship ~B1¼r/C2 ~A1. The vector,
ð~v2/C2~B1Þ/C0@~A1
@t/C0ru/C20/C21
; (12)
“represents the electromotive force per unit length acting on
the element dl2of the circuit” (Ref. 3, p. 222). Maxwell
rewrote Eq. (11) in a form that we translate as
E2¼þ
~Eeff/C1~dl2; (13)
where what we have denoted by ~Eeffwas represented by
Maxwell with the same symbol
 used for deﬁning the vec-
tor “electric intensity” (Ref. 8, p. 72).This denotation is inap-
propriate because the “electric intensity” (electric ﬁeld) must
279 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Giuseppe Giuliani 279 04 October 2023 22:51:15
be a solution of Maxwell’s equations, while ~Eeffis what will
later be called the Lorentz force on a unit positive charge.The following comments show that Maxwell implicitlyagreed with our interpretation, despite the use of the symbol
(in the following quotations we have added ~Eeffnext to
each symbol for clarity):
The vector
 (~Eeff) is the electromotive force at
the moving element dl2.
[…]The electromotive force at a point has already
been deﬁned in §68. It is also called the resultantelectrical force, being the force which would be
experienced by a unit of positive electricity placedat that point .
[…]
The electromotive force at a point, or on a particle,
must be carefully distinguished from theelectromotive force along an arc of a curve, thelatter quantity being the line-integral of the former.(See Sec. 69, pp. 222–223, Ref. 3; italics added).
These speciﬁcations conﬁrm that Maxwell indeed consid-
ered the vector of Eq. (12) as the force exerted by the elec-
tromagnetic ﬁeld on a unit positive charge: it is an extensionof the electrostatic force. Likely for this reason, Maxwelldenoted the two forces inappropriately with the same sym-
bol. Going into details, Maxwell stated that:
•The ﬁrst term ~v2/C2~B1is due to “the motion of the particle
through the magnetic ﬁeld” (Ref. 3, p. 223). In this passage,
the motion of the “particle” is identiﬁed with the motion ofthe “moving circuit’s element.” Therefore, in Eq. (12),t h e
velocity ~v
2is attributed to a unit of positive charge. It
would have required a microscopic model for the electriccurrent to note that the velocity of a charge is the sum ofthe velocity of the circuit element that contains the chargeand of the drift velocity of the charge (see Sec. III).
•The second term /C0@~A1=@t“depends on the time variation
of the magnetic ﬁeld. This may be due either to the time-variation of the electric current in the primary circuit, or tomotion of the primary circuit” (Ref. 3, p. 223).
•The third term ruis introduced “for the sake of giving
generality to the expression for ~Eeff. It disappears from the
integral when extended round the closed circuit. The quan-tityuis therefore indeterminate as far as regards the prob-
lem now before us, in which the total electromotive forceround the circuit is to be determined. We shall ﬁnd, how-ever, that when we know all the circumstances of theproblem, we can assign a deﬁnite value to u, and that it
represents, according to a certain deﬁnition, the electricpotential at the point ( x,y,z)” (Ref. 3, p. 222).
According to Maxwell, the induced electromotive force is
given by the integral over the complete circuit of the force
exerted by the electromagnetic ﬁeld on a unit positivecharge.
Maxwell’s long derivation of the law of electromagnetic
induction is very complicated. This feature has probably ledMaxwell’s contemporaries to overlook it and ignore thephysical novelties it contained. Furthermore, the choice ofusing the Lagrange formalism—dictated by Maxwell’s igno-rance of what an electric current is likely rendered thederivation too abstract for the tastes of his contemporaries.
In the following years, and until today, textbook writers,with the exception of Bouasse,
6ignored Maxwell’s general
law (see Sec. VIand Ref. 7).
Section IIIwill straightforwardly re-derive Maxwell’s law
by correctly deﬁning the induced electromotive force andcasting it in Maxwell–Lorentz–Einstein electromagnetism.
III. ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION WITHIN
MAXWELL–LORENTZ–EINSTEINELECTROMAGNETISM
In an axiomatic presentation of Maxwell–Lorentz–
Einstein (MLE) electromagnetism, one usually begins withMaxwell’s equations in vacuum (in the vectorial form given
to them by Oliver Heaviside
9). If we deﬁne the charge den-
sityqand the current density ~J, the electric and the magnetic
ﬁelds ~Eand ~B, together with the two constants e0andl0
remain still without physical dimensions and physical mean-
ing. The assumption of the Lorentz force,
~F¼qð~Eþ~v/C2~BÞ; (14)
allows one to establish the physical dimensions of the two
ﬁelds ~Eand ~B, together with those of the two constants e0
andl0.
Following Ref. 10, we shall deﬁne the induced electromo-
tive force as
E¼þ
lð~Eþ~vc/C2~BÞ/C1~dl; (15)
where ~vcis the velocity of the positive charges which are, by
convention, the current’s carriers, and ~E;~Bare solutions of
Maxwell’s equations. This integral yields, numerically, thework done by the Lorentz force on a unit positive point charge
along the considered closed path. Of course, the deﬁnition (15)
is an assumption whose validity rests on the experimentalcorroboration of all predictions derived from it. Since
~E¼/C0 r u/C0
@~A
@t; (16)
with ubeing the scalar potential and ~Abeing the vector
potential, we have
E¼þ
l/C0ru/C0@~A
@t/C18/C19
þð~vc/C2~BÞ/C20/C21
/C1~dl
¼þ
l/C0@~A
@t/C18/C19
þð~vc/C2~BÞ/C20/C21
/C1~dl: (17)
Equations (15) and(17) are the same as Maxwell’s with the
fundamental speciﬁcation that the velocity ~vcis the velocity of
the positive charges and not the velocity of the circuit element
containing them. They are valid for any integration line.
We attribute an electromotive force11also to batteries or
sources of alternate current. A general deﬁnition of what anelectromotive force is, was given, for instance, by Slater andFrank in their concise textbook, Electromagnetism :
By deﬁnition, the emfaround a circuit equals the total
work done, both by electric and magnetic forces andby any other sort of forces, such as those concerned in
280 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Giuseppe Giuliani 280 04 October 2023 22:51:15
chemical processes, per unit charge, in carrying a
charge around the circuit (Ref. 12,p .7 9 ) .
Equations (15) and(17) are local laws:13they relate the
line integral quantity Eat the instant tto other physical quan-
tities deﬁned at each point of the integration line at the sameinstant t. In the case of a rigid ﬁliform circuit, Eqs. (15) and
(17) are Lorentz-invariant (Ref. 10andAppendix ). A proper
description of the relative inertial motion of a magnet and a
rigid conducting loop has been considered by Einstein as one
of the reasons for the development of special relativity.14
The proof of Lorentz invariance already given in Ref. 10
concerns the relative motion of a magnet and a circuit. It is
easy to extend the proof to the general case in which the
source of the magnetic ﬁeld is not speciﬁed (See Appendix ).
Equation (17) implies that there are two independent con-
tributions to the induced emf: the time variation of the vector
potential and the effect of the magnetic ﬁeld on moving
charges. If every element of the circuit is at rest ,~vc¼~vd,
where ~vdis the drift velocity of the (positive) charges. Then,
Eq.(17) assumes the form
E¼/C0þ
l@~A
@t/C1~dlþþ
lð~vd/C2~BÞ/C1~dl: (18)
This equation shows that, in general, the drift velocity
contributes to the induced emf. In ﬁliform circuits, the second
line integral is null because, in every line element, ~vd(HTML
translation failed) is parallel to ~dl. In extended conductors, the
drift velocity plays a fundamental role. As shown in Ref. 10,t h e
case of Corbino’s disc is particularly interesting since the
application of Eq. (18) explains the magnetoresistance effect
without the need of microscopic models.
IV. WHERE IS THE INDUCED ELECTROMOTIVE
FORCE LOCALIZED?
As a consequence of the widespread adoption of the “ﬂux
rule,” the issue of the spatial localization of the induced emf
is usually ignored. Indeed, as we will show below, the “ﬂuxrule” cannot say, where the induced emfis localized. Hence,
for the users of the “ﬂux rule,” the question is meaningless.However, we shall show that this question indeed has physi-
cal meaning by considering the illustrative example of a bar
moving along a U-shaped conducting frame and immersed ina uniform and constant magnetic ﬁeld (Fig. 1).
This thought experiment goes back to Maxwell (Ref. 3,
pp. 218–219). Conceptually, it can be considered as a versionof Faraday’s disc (Ref. 10), in which the rotation of the disc
is substituted by the inertial motion of part of the circuit,
thus allowing the use of two inertial reference frames. In the
following discussion, it is conventionally assumed that the
mobile charges are positive. Because in the laboratory refer-
ence frame, the vector potential is constant, the induced emf
is due only to the line integralÞ
lð~vc/C2~BÞ/C1~dlof Eq. (17), and
the only portion of the circuit in which it is non-zero is theAB segment. Therefore, the induced emf is given by E
¼/C0B
yva(the circulation along the contour is counted as
positive when clockwise in Fig. 1). The emfis localized in
the bar: the bar acts as a battery, with the positive pole at
point B. The current ﬂows from AtoB, i.e., from the point at
lower potential to that at higher potential, like in a battery.
However, for a pair of points on the immobile frame T, the
current ﬂows from the point at higher potential to that at
lower potential. The concept of localization of the induced
emf, therefore, has physical meaning because it allows the
prediction—testable by experiment—of how the potential
difference between two points is related to the current ﬂow.If we drop this concept, we decrease the predictive and
explanatory power of the theory.
The “ﬂux rule” predicts the correct induced emf. The ﬂux
of the magnetic ﬁeld through the area ABCD is U¼B
yavt,
if at t¼0 the bar AB coincides with the arm DC of the
frame. Then
E¼/C0dU
dt¼/C0Byav; (19)
where the minus sign indicates that the induced current
circulates counterclockwise, as indicated in Fig. 1. The “ﬂux
rule” cannot say, where the emf is localized; it can only
guess that it might be localized in the bar AB because it is
moving (on the grounds that it is the bar’s motion that
produces the variation of the magnetic ﬁeld’s ﬂux and,
hence, the induced emf).
However, applying the same argument in the (primed)
reference frame of the bar AB, it will be said that the emfis
localized in the opposite vertical arm CD of the frame,because it is seeing moving away from the bar along the
negative direction of the common x/C17x
0axis. This state-
ment is false, because, in the reference frame of the bar AB
also, the emfis localized in the bar. In fact, at every point of
the bar’s reference frame, there is an electric ﬁeld—due to
the ﬁelds’ transformation equations (see Appendix )—given
by
E0
z¼CvBy: (20)
Therefore, an emfE0¼CvBya¼CEis induced in the bar. In
the arm CD, the effect of the electric ﬁeld E0
zon the charges
is exactly balanced by the magnetic component of the
Lorentz force, and due to the motion (– v) of the arm CD in
the ﬁeld B0
y¼CBy. The relation E0¼CE, thus obtained, is a
particular case of the more general one treated in Appendix .
If the entire circuit is homogeneous (the frame and the bar
are of the same material and have the same section), thephysics of the circuit is as follows (see Table I). At every
point of the circuit (bar included), there is a current density
given by
J¼Ee
q¼1
qvBa
l; (21)Fig. 1. A bar AB of length amoves with constant velocity ~valong the U-
shaped frame T in a uniform and constant magnetic ﬁeld ~B, produced by a
source at rest in the laboratory and directed along the positive direction of
theyaxis. The arrow in the lower part of the frame indicates the direction of
ﬂow of the current I.
281 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Giuseppe Giuliani 281 04 October 2023 22:51:15
where Eeis an “effective electric ﬁeld,” qis the resistivity of
the material, and lis the length of the entire circuit (frame
þbar). In the bar, the effective electric ﬁeld vBa/lis the sum
of two opposing ﬁelds: the induced electric ﬁeld ~Ei¼vB^z
and an electrostatic ﬁeld Ees¼Ei/C0Eedirected along the
negative direction of the zaxis. The origin of this ﬁeld can
be explained as follows. Let us consider the bar moving
without touching the frame. The induced electric ﬁeldE
i¼vB, pushes the positive charges towards the point B: this
point becomes positively charged, and point Anegatively
charged. Therefore, an electrostatic ﬁeld Eesdirected from B
toAis established: this ﬁeld nulliﬁes the induced electric
ﬁeld in a stationary condition.If the bar slides while touching
the frame, a current ﬂows in the circuit: while the induced
electric ﬁeld maintains its original value, the value of the
electrostatic ﬁeld Eesdiminishes and is such that Ees¼Ei
/C0Eein stationary regime. Finally, it can be easily veriﬁed
that the ﬁeld deﬁned as ~Ec¼~Eein the frame and as
~Ec¼~Eesin the moving bar is conservative. This result
allows calculating the potential difference between two
arbitrary points of the circuit, which is given by the line
integral of the conservative electric ﬁeld between the two
points. Naturally, the calculation leads to Ohm’s law, as
implied by the starting equation (21), which is Ohm’s law in
local form.
The bar we have discussed acts precisely like a battery.
The circuital laws are, therefore, similar. We know that
complicated chemical reactions take place in a battery.
However, its circuital behavior can be described with amodel which involves similar E
i,Ee,a n d Ees. The induced
electric ﬁeld of the bar corresponds to the electromotive
ﬁeld of the battery; the electrostatic ﬁeld is present in both
cases, and in both cases, the effective electric ﬁeld inside
the battery is given by the difference between the previous
two.
One must supply mechanical power to keep the bar AB in
motion with a constant velocity. If the bar’s motion is fric-
tionless, this power is equal to the electrical power dissipated
in the circuit. Indeed, the electrical power supplied by theelectromotive force is given by
WðEÞ ¼ E I¼E2
R¼ðvBaÞ2
R; (22)
where Ris the resistance of the circuit. This power is
dissipated as heat. For energy conservation, the powersupplied by the electromotive force must come from the
mechanical work done by the force keeping the bar in
motion. If a current Iﬂows in the bar along the positive
direction of the zaxis, the magnetic ﬁeld Bexerts a force on
the bar given by /C0IBa^x: it tends to slow down the bar. An
equal and opposite force must be supplied to the bar to keep
it in motion. Its magnitude is given byF¼IBa¼vBa
R/C18/C19
Ba: (23)
The mechanical power necessary for maintaining the bar in
motion is
WðFÞ¼Fv¼ðvBaÞ2
R¼E2
R¼WðEÞ: (24)
The fact that the magnetic ﬁeld Bappears in the expression
of the electrical power supplied by the induced emfcontrasts
the fact that, in a vacuum, the magnetic force does not
produce work on a moving charge. Here, the magnetic ﬁeld
plays only the role of a mediator between the mechanical
force and the electrical power (through the term ~vc/C2~B)
without yielding any amount of energy.
Let us note that the system described here is quasi-
stationary, because the length of the frame entering the
circuit increases with time.
V. WHY THE “FLUX RULE” IS NOT A PHYSICAL
LAW
In this section, we shall compare the general law of
electromagnetic induction (17), derived within MLE
Electromagnetism, with the “ﬂux rule” (2). Note that the
expression of the induced emf(17) contains the vector poten-
tial~A, as in Maxwell’s formula (11).
We shall consider a closed conducting ﬁliform loop
immersed in a magnetic ﬁeld and in motion. This loop is not
assumed to be rigid, so that it can deform. As is usual, the
induced emf can also be written in terms of the magnetic
ﬁeld. Starting from Eq. (15), we write, in the reference frame
of the laboratory
E¼þ
l~E/C1~dlþþ
lð~vc/C2~BÞ/C1~dl
¼ð
Sr/C2 ~E/C1^nd Sþþ
lð~vc/C2~BÞ/C1~dl
¼/C0ð
S@~B
@t/C1^nd Sþþ
lð~vc/C2~BÞ/C1~dl; (25)
where Sis any arbitrary surface that has the closed wire
las contour. We then use the identity, valid for every
vector ﬁeld with null divergence (see, for instance, Ref. 15,
pp. 10–11)
ð
S@~B
@t/C1^nd S¼d
dtð
S~B/C1^nd Sþþ
lð~vl/C2~BÞ/C1~dl; (26)
where ~vlis the velocity of the wire element dland can be
different for each wire element. Then, Eq. (25) becomes
E¼/C0dU
dt/C0þ
lð~vl/C2~BÞ/C1~dlþþ
lð~vc/C2~BÞ/C1~dl: (27)
In the case of a rigid, ﬁliform wire moving with velocity V
along the positive direction of the common x0/C17xaxis, this
equation takes the form
E¼/C0dU
dt/C0þ
lð~V/C2~BÞ/C1~dlþþ
lð~vc/C2~BÞ/C1~dl: (28)Table I. Electric ﬁelds in the bar. The arrow indicates the direction of the
ﬁeld along the zaxis.
Electric field Symbol Value Direction
Induced Ei vB "
Effective Ee vBa/l "
Electrostatic Ees vBð1/C0a=lÞ#
282 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Giuseppe Giuliani 282 04 October 2023 22:51:15
This equation is not the “ﬂux rule.” To get it, we must
abandon special relativity and try using Galilean relativity.Since V/C28cand v
d/C28c, we can write: ~vc¼~Vþ~vd
(c¼1 Þ . Then, we get
E¼/C0dU
dtþþ
lð~vd/C2~BÞ/C1~dl¼/C0dU
dt; (29)
i.e., the “ﬂux rule.” (The line integral is null because, for
every wire element, the drift velocity of the charges ~vdis
parallel to ~dl.)
In the reference frame of the circuit, we have
E0¼/C0ð
S0@~B0
@t0/C1^n0dS0þþ
l0ð~v0
d/C2~B0Þ/C1~dl0
¼/C0d
dt0ð
S0~B0/C1^n0dS0¼/C0dU0
dt0: (30)
The “ﬂux rule”—for ﬁliform and rigid circuits—is valid in
both reference frames if one uses the Galilean transformationof velocities, namely, Galilean relativity ( c¼1 ). Notice
that using the Galilean velocity composition is a sufﬁcient
condition for the “ﬂux rule” being Galileo-invariant. It isalso necessary because, without the Galilean approximation,
the “ﬂux rule” cannot even be established: we would have to
stop at Eq. (28). Finally, notice that the “ﬂux rule” is
Galileo-invariant at ﬁrst sight. In the Galilean limit ( c¼1 )
of the relativistic transformations of electric and magnetic
ﬁelds, ~B
0¼~B. On the other hand, areas and time intervals
have the same value in two inertial reference frames. Itfollows that dU=dt¼dU
0=dt0, i.e., that the “ﬂux rule” is
Galileo invariant and the induced emfhas the same value in
every inertial frame. How can a Galileo-invariant equationbe accepted in a relativistic theory as MLE electromagnetism?
These considerations constitute a ﬁrst argument against the
“ﬂux rule” being a physical law.
Second, let us note that the integral in Eq. (29) is null only
if the circuit is ﬁliform. If not, the extension of the materialmakes ~v
dnon parallel to the circuit element ~dl, and the “ﬂux
rule” is not obeyed. In fact,
E¼/C0dU
dtþþ
lð~vd/C2~BÞ/C1~dl: (31)
Differently from Eq. (29), the integral is not null owing to
the extension of the material.
Third, we would like to emphasize that the general law
(17) is a local one. However, the “ﬂux rule” does not satisfy
the locality condition. It relates the emfinduced in a conduct-
ing ﬁliform circuit at time tto the time variation—at the
exact same instant t—of the ﬂux of the magnetic ﬁeld
through an arbitrary surface that has the circuit as a contour.
Consequently, the “ﬂux rule” cannot be causally interpreted,because what happens at the surface at time tcannot inﬂu-
ence what happens in the circuit at the same instant t, unless
physical interactions can propagate with inﬁnite speed.Moreover, since one can arbitrary choose the integration sur-
face, we should have endless causes of the same effect: the
variation of the ﬂux of the magnetic ﬁeld through any arbi-trary surface, however large, which has the wire as its con-tour would then be the cause of the induced emf, thus
violating, again, the locality condition. As shown above in
the case of the moving bar, the “ﬂux rule,” though predictingthe correct value of the induced emf, cannot say anything
about the physical processes involved or about their causal
nature. It is just a mathematical relation between two physi-
cal quantities, devoid of physical insight. It can be used, with
great care, as a calculation shortcut only when guided by the
predictions of the general law.
Moreover, the “ﬂux rule” does not always yield the correct
prediction. Indeed, in 1914, Andr /C19e Blondel showed that there
could be a ﬂux variation without any induced emf, thus falsi-
fying the “ﬂux rule.”
16
Blondel used a solenoid wound around a wooden cylinder A
placed between the circular armature plates of an electromagnet(Fig. 2). He attached one end of the solenoid to another parallel
wooden cylinder B outside the electromagnet (where the
magnetic ﬁeld is null). He then unrolled the solenoid as he
transferred the coils from cylinder A to cylinder B, while
maintaining the unrolling wire tangent to the two cylinders.16,17
According to the “ﬂux rule,” during the transfer of the coil from
cylinder A to cylinder B, an emfshould be induced in the
unrolling solenoid, according to the equation
jEj ¼ /C0 UsinglecoildN
dt/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12; (32)
where U
singlecoil is the magnetic ﬂux through one coil and Nthe
number of coils on cylinder A. Since the radius of a coil was
0.1 m, B¼0.08 T and jdN=dtj¼6:66, the emfpredicted in
(32) is 0.017 V, well above the detection capability of the
D’Ansorval’s galvanometer Blondel used to monitor the
current in the circuit. Contrary to what is predicted by the “ﬂux
rule,” the galvanometer showed no deviation (Refs. 16and17).
Of course, the general law (17) predicts that in Blondel’s
experiment, there is no induced emf. Indeed, the ﬁrst line integral
is null because the vector potential does not depend on time. If,during the unrolling of the solenoid, the unrolling wire is kept
tangent to the two cylinders, the second integral is also null
because the term ~v
c/C2~Bhas a null component along the wire.
Fig. 2. Sketch of Blondel’s experiment testing the “ﬂux rule.” M1andM2
are the circular plates of an electromagnet: the magnetic ﬁeld between the
two plates is equal to 0.08 T and is “reasonable uniform.” R is a resistance,
and G is a D’Ansorval galvanometer. A and B are two wooden cylinders.
The two “r” represent the intersection of a conducting ring attached to cylin-
der A with the plane of the ﬁgure. The two arrows indicate sliding electric
contacts. A conducting coil wound around cylinder A, placed within the
electromagnet, is unrolled and transferred to cylinder B, where the magnetic
ﬁeld is null.
283 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Giuseppe Giuliani 283 04 October 2023 22:51:15
Blondel’s experiment has been rapidly forgotten.19
VI. WHY DID MAXWELL’S GENERAL LAW FALL
INTO OBLIVION?
We have already stressed that the abstract and complicated
derivation of Maxwell’s general law may have been anobstacle to its acceptance for his contemporaries (Sec. II).
The elimination of the vector potential by Hertz and
Heaviside from Maxwell’s Electromagnetism has very likelycontributed to the oblivion of Maxwell’s general law.
17In
particular, one aspect might have had a lasting conceptual
impact. Heaviside doubted that the vector potential couldhave physical meaning: “…[Maxwell] makes use of an aux-
iliary function, the vector potential of the electric current,
and this rather complicates the matter, especially as regardsthe physical meaning of the process. It is always desirable
when possible to keep as near as one can to ﬁrst principles”
(Ref. 22, p. 46). Hertz compared the vector potential to a
scaffolding that can be removed after the building has beencompleted. Hertz too was doubtful about the physical mean-
ing of the vector potential: “…one would expect to ﬁnd in
these [fundamental] equations relations between the physicalmagnitudes which are actually observed, and not between
magnitudes which serve for calculations only.”
23
However, other factors may have contributed, and in par-
ticular, the role played by textbooks. In his The Structure of
Scientiﬁc Revolutions , Thomas Kuhn has stressed the primary
role played by textbooks in transmitting the acquired knowl-
edge to new generations.24To verify the role played by text-
books in the oblivion of Maxwell’s general law, we have
analyzed eleven university textbooks—considered represen-
tative due to their authors or their popularity. Here is a con-cise overview; one can ﬁnd the detailed analysis in Ref. 7.
In all these textbooks, the treatment of induction begins
with the presentation of a series of Faraday’s experiments,
distinguishing between those involving the relative motionof a magnet and a circuit (magneto-electric induction, in
Faraday’s language) and those in which the induced current
is due to the current variation in another circuit (volta-electric induction). The theoretical description of these
phenomena varies greatly, ranging from the elementary treat-
ment by Riecke,
25to the more sophisticated ones involving
the relativistic nature of Electromagnetism.26,27
Except for Feynman’s Lectures ,4Zangwill’s,15and
Grifﬁths’18texts, all these textbooks refer to the “ﬂux rule” as
the “law of electromagnetic induction.” These texts adhere,knowingly or not, to the introductory part of Maxwell’s discus-
sion of electromagnetic induction and ignore his general law.
Indeed, a typical theoretical treatment (see, for instance,
Ref. 27, p. 233) is based on the deﬁnition of the induced
emfas
E
C¼þ
l~E/C1~dl: (33)
This deﬁnition stems from the electrostatic law ~F¼q~E, and
it leads to the correct result only if applied in the reference
frame of a rigid ﬁliform circuit. It cannot be used when the
circuit moves.
By using Stokes’ theorem and Maxwell’s equationr/C2 ~E¼/C0@~B
@t; (34)
it is found that
EC¼þ
l~E/C1~dl¼ð
Sr/C2 ~E/C1^nd S
¼/C0ð
S@~B
@t/C1^nd S¼/C0d
dtð
S~B/C1^nd S ;(35)
namely, the “ﬂux rule.” Notice that the last equality is valid
only if the ﬁliform and rigid circuit is at rest.
Another type of approach consists in stating the “ﬂux rule”
as a law inferred from experiments—as Maxwell did as a
ﬁrst step—and exploring how it effectively deals with many
experimental situations. Within this approach, starting fromthe “ﬂux rule,” the differential Maxwell’s equation of the
curl of the electric ﬁeld is derived (Ref. 12, p. 80; Ref. 29,
pp. 158–159; Ref. 30, pp. 158–159).
Modern textbooks widely use the vector potential to calcu-
late the effects of currents or magnets. Nevertheless, they do
not use the vector potential to treat electromagnetic induc-
tion: see, for instance, Ref. 15, pp. 462–463. This choice
implicitly does not make any distinction between equations
that obey the locality condition and those that don’t. The
general law of electromagnetic induction belongs to the for-mer; the “ﬂux rule” to the latter.
VII. TEACHING ISSUES
Teaching the modern formulation of Maxwell’s general
law in advanced courses poses no problems. However, it may
be more difﬁcult in high schools or elementary physicscourses.
31Here, we suggest a way of introducing Maxwell’s
general law and the vector potential by using Faraday’s well-
known experiment, commonly reproduced in didacticlaboratories: the relative motion of a magnet and a rigid,ﬁliform coil (see Appendix ). Reference 32describes a
laboratory session in which, starting from the autonomous
experimenting by students, the general law of electromagneticinduction is obtained through a collective discussion that is
guided, when necessary, by the instructor.
The starting point for the theoretical description of the
(thought) experiment should be the deﬁnition of the inducedemfgiven in Eq. (15). Instructors should adapt the formalism
to their teaching contexts, while keeping two cornerstones:
the necessity of describing the phenomenon in the two refer-ence frames and that of a local description in the coil’s refer-
ence frame.
Equation (17) is written step by step by asserting that a
physical law must have the same form in every inertialframe. Our proposal derives the expression of the electric
ﬁeld entering the deﬁnition (15), thus obtaining the modern
formulation of Maxwell’s general law. It must be stressedthat Eq. (17) will not be derived but only reasonably
guessed.
In the reference frame of the magnet, the magnetic ﬁeld is
constant, and there is no electric ﬁeld.Therefore, the inducedemfcan be due only to a term ~V/C2~B, as suggested by the
magnetic component of the Lorentz force ( ~Vis the velocity
of the coil with respect to the magnet)
284 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Giuseppe Giuliani 284 04 October 2023 22:51:15
E¼þ
lð~V/C2~BÞ/C1~dl: (36)
In the reference frame of the coil, the induced current must
be due to an electric ﬁeld ~E0such that
E0¼þ
l0~E0/C1~dl0¼/C0d
dt0ð
S0~B0/C1^n0dS0: (37)
Following Maxwell (Ref. 3, pp. 27–28), we write this
equation in terms of a vector deﬁned at each point of thecoil: this will ensure the locality of the phenomenon. Let usdenote this vector ~A
0and call it “vector potential”:
E0¼þ
l0~E0/C1~dl0¼/C0d
dt0ð
S0~B0/C1^n0dS0¼/C0d
dt0þ
l0~A0/C1~dl0: (38)
Naturally, this is Maxwell’s Eq. (7). Because the integration
line does not depend on time, the above equation assumesthe form
E
0¼þ
l0~E0/C1~dl0¼þ
l0/C0@~A0
@t0/C1~dl0 !
: (39)
Because a physical law must be valid in every inertial frame,
we conclude that the law of electromagnetic induction shouldbe written as a combination of Eqs. (36)and(39), i.e., as
E
0¼þ
l0/C0@~A0
@t0þð~V/C2~B0Þ"#
/C1~dl0: (40)
This equation is valid in both reference frames: the second
term of the integral operates in the magnet’s referenceframe; the other in the coil’s frame. At this point, one shouldrecall that Eq. (40) is valid also if, instead of a moving
magnet, we have a primary circuit in which a variablecurrent ﬂows: see Appendix and the discussion of Purcell
and Morin’s textbook in Ref. 7.
From this point on, instructors can reﬁne the proposal
according to their teaching contexts, having in mind thecomplete treatment of Sec. III. One could introduce the dis-
tinction between the velocity of the coil and that of the
charges contained in it. As for the expression between the
two square brackets of Eq. (40), the instructor could general-
ize it by adding the term /C0ru.
By considering the apparatus of Fig. 3, one can derive the
expression of the vector potential in an exemplar case. A lowfrequency alternating current Iﬂows in a long solenoid S of
radius a
S, thus creating a time-varying magnetic ﬁeld. In the
case of an ideal solenoid (constituted by an inﬁnite array ofcircular coils), the magnetic ﬁeld outside the solenoid is null,whereas ~B¼l
0nI^zinside the solenoid, with nthe number of
turns per unit length of the solenoid, and ^zthe unit vector
along the solenoid’s symmetry axis.
According to the law (40), the emfinduced in the ﬁliform
ring is given by
E¼/C0þ
R@~A
@t/C1~dl¼/C0d
dtþ
R~A/C1~dl¼/C02paRdA
dt; (41)
where aRis the radius of the ring. The induced emfcan also
be written asE¼/C0d
dtð
S~B/C1^ndS¼/C0 l0npa2
SdI
dt; (42)
where Sis an arbitrary surface that has the ring as contour.
By equating the last members of the two equations above,we get
A¼l
0na2
S
2aRI; (43)
where the constant of integration is taken to be to zero to
obtain a vector ﬁeld that vanishes far from the source. Thevector potential has the same absolute value at every point ofthe ring and the induced emfis distributed homogeneously
along the ring: the ring acts as a source of current. Takingtwo points Mand Non the ring, we have the electric
potential difference
u
M/C0uN¼EDa
2p/C0iDR¼EDa
2p/C0E
RRDa
2p/C18/C19
¼0; (44)
where iis the induced current, DRis the resistance of the
MN arc, and Daits angle. The ﬁliform ring is an
equipotential line.
Equation (43) shows that the sources of the vector poten-
tial are the currents—namely, charges in motion—as it is forthe magnetic ﬁeld. Equation (39) shows that the vector
potential (i.e., the charges in motion) contributes to the valueof the electric ﬁeld through its partial derivative with respectto time. On the other hand, Eq. (38) establishes a relation
between the vector potential and the magnetic ﬁeld, at the
same instant , in different regions of space: a line and an arbi-
trary surface that has the line as a contour. The arbitrarinessof the choice of the integration surface suggests a strong spa-tial relationship between the vector potential and the mag-netic ﬁeld: instructors know that ~B¼r/C2 ~Aand, depending
on the teaching context, can communicate to the students theexplicit form of this equation or its essential feature (depen-dence of the magnetic ﬁeld on the spatial partial derivativesof the vector potential components). In other words, the vec-tor potential depends both on the spatial coordinates and ontime. The dependence on the coordinates relates the vectorpotential to the magnetic ﬁeld; the dependence on time,relates the vector potential to the electric ﬁeld.
To wind it all up, the instructor should discuss again the
issue of the transition from the conceptual framework of theFig. 3. Induction between a ring Rand a solenoid Sthrough which ﬂows a
low frequency alternating current I, see also Refs. 17and28.
285 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Giuseppe Giuliani 285 04 October 2023 22:51:15
action at a distance to a ﬁeld description of electromagnetic
phenomena. In addition to the path going from the existenceof a charge to the explanation of the force between twocharges (charge !ﬁelds !force on another charge), there
is another one according to which charges create potentials
that give rise to ﬁelds and, in turn, to a force exerted on othercharges (charge !potentials !ﬁelds !force on another
charge). Here, we have an example of how physicists usemathematics to build increasingly abstract theories, butwhich are, sometimes—as in the case of the potentials—more apt at dealing with the intrinsic Lorentz invariance ofMaxwell’s electromagnetism.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
The rooting and the persistence of the “ﬂux rule” appear
to be an example of the collective processes studied byLudwik Fleck in his Genesis and Development of a Scientiﬁc
Fact, ﬁrst published in German in 1935 (Ref. 33, p. 27):
Once a structurally complete and closed system of
opinions consisting of many details and relations
has been formed, it offers enduring resistance to
anything that contradicts it.
[…]
What we are faced with here is not so much simple
passivity or mistrust of new ideas as an active
approach which can be divided into several stages.(1) A contradiction to the system appearsunthinkable. (2) What does not ﬁt into the systemremains unseen; (3) alternatively, if it is noticed,either it is kept secret, or (4) laborious efforts aremade to explain an exception in terms that do notcontradict the system. (5) Despite the legitimate
claims of contradictory views, one tends to see,
describe, or even illustrate those circumstanceswhich corroborate current views and thereby givethem substance.
In our opinion, this description ﬁts to a large extent the
case of the “ﬂux rule.” Textbooks played a fundamental rolein this process. Understanding this role and bringing to thesurface its main traits would require a study encompassingphysics, epistemology, and social behaviors. It goes beyondthe aims of this paper and our competence. We can only
underline some aspects of the issue. Generally, a rooted theo-
retical description of some phenomena is shaken when a newexperimental result contrasts the accepted view. In the caseof the “ﬂux rule,” Blondel’s experiment should have put itunder ﬁre. However, this did not happen. Thomas Kuhn hasdescribed the resistance of an acquired view against experi-mental results that undermine it. Generally, the change of anacquired view is provoked by a series of new experimental
results and/or by a radical change in a broader theoretical
contest. Einstein’s relativistic electromagnetism should haveplayed this role. Nevertheless, it did not. Indeed, textbookssometimes touch on this issue but do not wholly develop itsconsequences to the point of asking: what invariancy is satis-ﬁed by the “ﬂux rule”? Moreover, if it emerges that the “ﬂuxrule” is Galileo-invariant, how can it be tolerated in a wholly
relativistic theory? Another critical issue is constituted by
the historical falsehoods encountered in many texts. Thesefalsehoods are possible because textbook writers do notcheck their statements with historical records but adhere tosome anonymous historical tradition. This habit amounts to
dismissing the cultural role of historical studies. Historical
falsehoods can also distort physics. This issue should also be
explored from a sociological point of view. Finally, it seemsclear that the lack of an epistemological commitment favors
the tradition’s persistence.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank Biagio Buonaura for many
helpful discussions on this subject. The comments and
suggestions of the two anonymous Referees have alsocontributed to give the paper its ﬁnal form.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conﬂict of Interest
The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
APPENDIX: LORENTZ INVARIANCE OF THE
GENERAL LAW OF ELECTROMAGNETICINDUCTION
Let us consider a magnetic ﬁeld source at rest in the labo-
ratory reference frame. A ﬁliform, rigid circuit moves with
velocity Valong the positive direction of the common x/C17x
0
axis. In the circuit’s reference frame, the general law (17)
assumes the form
E0¼þ
~E0/C1~dl0þþ
ð~v0
d/C2~B0Þ/C1~dl0; (A1)
where ~v0
dis the drift velocity of the charges. The second
integral is null because the drift velocity is parallel to ~dl0in
every circuit element, so that we are left with the ﬁrst line
integral. Taking into account the ﬁeld’s transformation
E0
x¼Ex
E0
y¼CEyþð~V/C2~BÞyhi
E0
z¼CEzþð~V/C2~BÞzhi
;
where C¼1=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0V2=c2p
, and the coordinates
transformations
dx0¼Cdx
dy0¼dy
dz0¼dz;
we get
E0¼Cþ
ExdxþCþ
Eyþð~V/C2~BÞyhi
dy
þCþ
Ezþð~V/C2~BÞzhi
dz
¼Cþ
~Eþð~V/C2~BÞ/C1~dlhi
: (A2)
In the laboratory reference frame, we have
286 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Giuseppe Giuliani 286 04 October 2023 22:51:15
E¼þ
ð~Eþ~V/C2~BÞ/C1~dl: (A3)
Hence,
E0¼CE: (A4)
We have thus shown that the phenomenon of
electromagnetic induction, involving electric and magnetic
ﬁelds, must be treated relativistically, as claimed by
Einstein.14Provided that the relative velocity is such that
V/C28c, we can assume C’1, and the predicted value of C
differs from 1 by an experimentally not detectable amount.
a)Electronic mail: giuseppe.giuliani@unipv.it, ORCID: 0000-0003-0283-
2110.
1M. Faraday, Experimental Researches in Electricity (Taylor, London,
1839), Vol. I, pp. 1–16.
2E. Lenz, “ €Uber die bestimmung der richtung der durch elektrodynamische
vertheilung erregten galvanischen str €ome,” Ann. Phys. Chem. 107,
483–494 (1834).
3J. C. Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism , 2nd ed.
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1881), Vol. II.
4R. Feynman, R. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on
Physics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1963), Vol. II, pp. 17.1–17.3.
5A. D. Yaghjian, “Maxwell’s derivation of the Lorentz force from
Faraday’s law,” Prog. Electromagnetics Res. M 93, 35–42 (2020).
6H. Bouasse, Cours de Magn /C19etisme et d’ /C19Electricit /C19e - Premie `re Partie
-/C19etude du champ magn /C19etique (Delagrave, Paris, 1914).
7See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0138144 for a discussion of how eleven textbooks treat electro-
magnetic induction.
8J. C. Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism , 2nd. ed.
(Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1881), Vol. I.
9B. J. Hunt, “Oliver heaviside: A ﬁrst-rate oddity,” Phys. Today 65(11),
48–54 (2012).
10G. Giuliani, “A general law for electromagnetic induction,” EPL 81,
60002 (2008).
11The name “electromotive force” is misleading, because, as we know, theelectromotive force is not a force: it has the dimensions of an electric poten-tial, and it is measured in volts. Since a more suitable name has not beeninvented, we shall keep on using the same name. It is worth noting that,today’s use of some historical names appears to have no justiﬁcation. Forinstance, we ﬁnd that the magnetic ﬁeld ~B, recovering a nineteenth cen-
tury’s denotation, is called “magnetic induction vector”; and the ﬁeld ~H,
whose sources are the current densities ~J, is called “magnetic ﬁeld.” Then
one has to stress that what appears in the expression of the Lorentz force isthe magnetic induction vector and not the magnetic ﬁeld. Let us also men-tion the conceptual confusion created by the habit of recalling the contribu-tions of different researchers in the name of a formula, a habit that often
badly distorts history. For instance, as for the “ﬂux rule,” we have encoun-
tered the denomination “Faraday–Neumann–Lenz law,” or variants at will.The presence of Lenz is justiﬁed by the sign ( /C0) that appears in the formula,
but Faraday and Neumann have nothing to do with the “ﬂux rule.”
12J. C. Slater and N. H. Frank, Electromagnetism (McGraw - Hill, New York, 1947).
13As it is well known, an equation is local if it relates physical quantities at
the same point at the same instant, or if it relates physical quantities in twodistinct points at two successive instants t
1,t2, provided that the distance d
between the two points satisﬁes the equation: d/C20cðt2/C0t1Þ. This locality
condition is necessary but not sufﬁcient for interpreting an equation caus-ally. For instance, let us consider the law ~F¼d~p=dt. As the momentum
varies over time, we are inclined to interpret this equation by saying thatthe force ~F“causes” the momentum variation. However, there are situa-
tions where the change in momentum “causes” a force. Consider, forexample, a completely absorbing surface Shit perpendicularly by a mono-
chromatic beam of light directed along the negative direction of the xaxis.
In this case, if Nis the number of photons absorbed per unit time, the sur-
face momentum P
xobeys: dPx=dt¼/C0Nh/C23=c¼Fx, and we can say that
the variation of the photons’ momentum has produced a radiative force Fx
on the surface S. A similar situation is found in the kinetic theory of gases:the pressure (force per unit area) on the walls is due to the exchange of
momentum with the particles.
14A. Einstein, “Zur electrodynamik bewegter k €orper,” Ann. Phys. 17,
891–921 (1905), English translation in The collected papers of Albert
Einstein , Vol. 2 (Princeton U.P., Princeton, NJ, 1905), pp. 140–171; avail-
able at https://einsteinpapers.press.princeton.edu/vol2-trans/154 .
15A. Zangwill, Modern Electrodynamics (Cambridge U. P., Cambridge, 2013).
16A. Blondel, “Sur l’ /C19enonc /C19e le plus general des lois de l’induction,” Compt.
Rend. Ac. Sc. 159, 674–679 (1914); available at http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/
12148/bpt6k3112q/f672.item .
17G. Giuliani, “Vector potential, electromagnetic induction and ‘physical
meaning’,” Eur. J. Phys. 31, 871–880 (2010).
18D. J. Grifﬁths, Introduction to Electrodynamics , 4th ed. (Pearson, Boston, 2013).
19The above discussion reminds us of another question. Let us consider
Maxwell’s equation:
r/C2 ~E¼/C0@~B
@t:
It is easy to ﬁnd statements according to which this equation shows that a
time-varying magnetic ﬁeld causes an electric ﬁeld (and symmetrical
statements for the equation of the curl of the magnetic ﬁeld). See, for
instance, Ref. 20, where statements of this kind are considered to be
conceptual misconceptions that one should avoid in teaching. The
equation states only a relation between the ﬁelds as the charges produce
them: see also Ref. 21. This is well illustrated by the equations that yield
the ﬁelds produced by a point charge in arbitrary motion. The electric and
magnetic ﬁelds are given by equations that depend on the charge’s
velocity and acceleration. These equations are independently deduced one
from the other (see, for instance, Ref. 15, pp. 870–879). Only ex-post, do
we ﬁnd that the two ﬁelds are related by the equation
~B¼1
cð^r/C3
21/C2~EÞ;
where ^r/C3
21is the unit vector pointing from the retarded position of the point
charge towards the point at which the ﬁeld is calculated. In the same spirit,
let us emphasize that the presentation of Maxwell’s equations in integral
form deals a mortal blow to the intrinsic local nature of Maxwell’s theory,
and it transforms the production of electromagnetic waves into a profoundmystery. These equations connect what happens on a closed line at time t
to what happens simultaneously on an arbitrary surface having the line as
a contour. This habit is widespread in textbooks for high school in Italy
but not—for instance—in textbooks published in the United States.
20S. E. Hill, “Rephrasing Faraday’s law,” Phys. Teach. 48, 410–412 (2010).
21O. D. Jeﬁmenko, “Presenting electromagnetic theory in accordance with
the principle of causality,” Eur. J. Phys. 25, 287–296 (2004).
22O. Heaviside, Electromagnetic Theory (The Electrician’ Printing and
Publishing Company, London, 1893), Vol. I.
23H. Hertz, Electric Waves (McMillan and CO, London, 1893), p. 196.
24T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions , 2nd ed. (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1970).
25E. Riecke, Lehrbuch Der Experimental Physik - Zweiter Band,
Magnetismus, Elektrizit €at. W €arme (Verlag von Veit & Co., Leipzig, 1896),
pp. 196–226; 254–268.
26L. L. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media
(Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1960), pp. 205–209.
27J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics , 3rd ed. (John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1999), pp. 208–211.
28G. Rousseaux, R. Kofman, and O. Minazzoli, “The Maxwell–Lodgeeffect: Signiﬁcance of electromagnetic potentials in the classical theory,”Eur. Phys. J. D 49, 249–256 (2008).
29W. K. H. Panofsky and M. Phillips, Classical Electricity Andf Magnetism ,
2nd ed. (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 1955).
30E. M. Purcell and D. J. Morin, Electricity and Magnetism , 3rd ed.
(Cambridge U. P., Cambridge, 2013).
31The applicability of this proposal to high schools depends on the mathe-matical background of the students. It is likely applicable in Italy’s scien-tiﬁc Lyceums, where mathematical knowledge is sufﬁcient to treat
electromagnetic induction as here suggested.
32G. Giuliani, “L’induzione elettromagnetica: un percorso didattico,” Gior.
Fis.49, 291–304 (2008).
33L. Fleck, Genesis and Development of a Scientiﬁc Fact (The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1979).
287 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 4, April 2023 Giuseppe Giuliani 287 04 October 2023 22:51:15
