
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| JUNE 01 2023
Endless fun in high dimensions—A quantum card game 
Lea Kopf  
 ; Markus Hiekkamäki  
 ; Shashi Prabhakar  
 ; Robert Fickler  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 458 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0062128
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Modeling of Lateral Dynamics for an Endless Steel Belt
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2010)
Development of fatigue stress spectrum and fatigue life prediction of endless winder sheave for wind
turbine lift using finite element analysis
J. Renewable Sustainable Energy  (August 2014)
Experimental study on influence of filler rods in gas T ungsten Arc welding
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2019) 04 October 2023 22:52:57
Endless fun in high dimensions—A quantum card game
LeaKopfa)and Markus Hiekkam €akib)
Photonics Laboratory, Physics Unit, Tampere University, Tampere FI-33720, Finland
Shashi Prabhakarc)
Photonics Laboratory, Physics Unit, Tampere University, Tampere FI-33720, Finland and Quantum Science
and Technology Laboratory, Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad 380009, India
Robert Ficklerd)
Photonics Laboratory, Physics Unit, Tampere University, Tampere FI-33720, Finland
(Received 23 March 2022; accepted 12 April 2023)
Quantum technologies enable new ways to distribute and process information. The enormous
progress over the recent decades has led to an urgent need for new educational programs totrain professionals to work in this ﬁeld. Here, we present a card game that teaches students the
building blocks of quantum computing through strategic gameplay. Participants start from the
lowest quantum state and play cards that change their state and/or their opponents’ state,aiming to build an algorithm that achieves the highest possible quantum state. Players can
utilize several different strategies that rely on quantum features such as randomness,
superposition, interference, and entanglement. Our game expands on the existing QjCards i
game, originally developed using traditional qubits (with 2-level states), by including an option
to play with qutrits (with 3-level states), and by developing cooperative and single player
modes in addition to the existing competitive mode. The presented game contributes to theongoing efforts on gamifying quantum physics education with a particular focus on the
counter-intuitive features that make quantum computing powerful.
#2023 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0062128
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum physics is one of the most successful branches
of physics. At the very heart of quantum physics are princi-ples such as randomness, superposition, interference, andentanglement. These concepts are difﬁcult to grasp as theyoften contradict our intuition, which we developed throughexperiencing our large-scale, classical world. It is thesecounter-intuitive features that have enabled novel technolo-gies, which would not be possible in a classical setting. Thisemerging technological thrust is often termed the secondquantum revolution,
1since it differs signiﬁcantly on the fun-
damental and application level from the ﬁrst set of technolo-gies developed through applying quantum physics, e.g.,
lasers or semiconductor devices.
One of the most prominent examples of quantum technol-
ogy is a quantum computer. Compared to their classicalcounterparts, quantum computers promise a faster comple-tion of certain tasks and would enable computational algo-rithms that are impossible in a classical setting. Recentprogress has led to the ﬁrst large-scale quantum computerthat outperforms all classical computers for one speciﬁccomputational task.
2,3
In this article, we present a card game that provides a fun
and engaging introduction to the concepts of quantum com-puting. The game, Endless Fun in high dimensions ,i s
designed to be a low threshold introduction to quantum com-puting that encourages people to look into the fundamentals
of quantum physics. The game implements basic quantum
mechanical concepts such as randomness, superposition,interference, and entanglement. By playing cards that corre-spond to quantum logic operations, the participants aremanipulating the quantum state of a virtual quantum com-puter with the aim of achieving the highest value of theirown quantum state. The ﬁnal result is evaluated using an
included computer program. We note that although current
quantum computers work with two-level quantum states, this
card game goes a step further by also including the program-ming of three-dimensional quantum systems, i.e., high-
dimensional quantum system. Such higher dimensional
states, called qudits rather than qubits, are considered prom-ising candidates for next generation quantum computers and
other technologies.
4–6They are also beneﬁcial in the gaming
setting as they increase the complexity of the game playenabling longer lasting (maybe endless) fun.
II. BACKGROUND
Building intuition often leads to a deeper understanding of
difﬁcult concepts and has been the focus of various gamiﬁca-
tion efforts.
7,8Games offer an entertaining way to loosen up
the atmosphere in a course while promoting learning.9,10
Education in quantum physics and, in particular, modern
quantum information science can beneﬁt from ideas devel-oped through gamiﬁcation methods.
Many quantum physicists hope that these games could be
more than just tools for learning, as expressed by John
Preskill who said “[p]erhaps kids who grow up playing quan-tum games will acquire a visceral understanding of quantum
phenomena that our generation lacks.”
11Popular examples
of quantum games are the online computer game Particle in
a Box ,12and “quantized” adaptations of well-known games:
Quantum TiqTaqToe ,13,14Quantum Chess ,15,16Quantum
Minigolf ,17as well as the quantum version of Minecraft—
qCraft .18In addition to online games, there are also educa-
tional board games, e.g., Entanglion by IBM.19The idea of
gamiﬁcation in quantum sciences has been the center of
458 Am. J. Phys. 91(6), June 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 458 04 October 2023 22:52:57
focus in various quantum game jams, i.e., events in which
instructive and entertaining quantum games are developed.20
At the Quantum Wheel game jam in Helsinki in 2019,20
the quantum card game QjCards iwas developed and intro-
duced.21The game presented here builds upon and extends
QjCards i. The gameplay in the basic version is similar and
only varies in small details. However, in contrast to
QjCards i,Endless Fun aims at building a high-dimensional
quantum computer, i.e., a quantum computer operating on
states with three possible values instead of two. The game
was also extended to three difﬁculty levels and two addi-
tional game modes.
III. ENDLESS FUN IN HIGH DIMENSIONS
Endless Fun is a strategic multi-player card game that intro-
duces the players to quantum computational logic gates. The
players aim to increase their quantum state value and decrease
the quantum state values of the other players. After all cards are
played, the ﬁnal quantum state values are calculated by evalua-
tion software. Comparing the expected outcome to the actual
outcome allows one to reﬂect on misunderstandings and retrace
the effects of each operation. The goal of this game is to pro-
vide a platform to practice and engage with quantum logic
operations while providing varying difﬁculty levels without the
necessity of fully understanding the underlying mathematicalframework. The instruction manual, the Python-based evalua-
tion software, the cards, and the riddles of the single-player
game mode are provided in the supplementary material.22
Although so far most quantum computers have used binary-
valued quantum systems to encode bit-valued quantum infor-
mation, the increase in possible outcomes when using high-
dimensional quantum systems enhances the complexity of the
game and offers options to adjust the difﬁculty. Thus, we antici-
pate a longer-lasting interest in playing the game. Furthermore,
the game includes a cooperative and a single-player game
mode to address different learning objectives.
A. Player states
In classical computation, information is saved as bit val-
ues: either 0 or 1. In the simplest forms of quantum comput-
ing, information is encoded into two-level systems called
quantum bits, or qubits . Similar to classical bits, qubits can
take values of j0iorj1i. However, the quantum nature also
allows for superpositions, i.e., being in both states at the
same time, loosely speaking. A superposition is written as a
sum over both possible states, e.g., 1 =ﬃﬃ ﬃ
2p
ðj0iþj1iÞ, which
means that any measurement can result in either outcome, 0or 1, with equal probability.23Note that we only allow for an
equal superposition with a probability amplitude of 1 =ﬃﬃ ﬃ
2p
in
the game; however, in general, all normalized amplitudes arepossible. High-dimensional quantum states, often called
qudits , go a step further in complexity, as they do not only
allow two but dpossible outcomes. The game can be played
with either two- or three-dimensional quantum states. In 2D,only the qubit values j0iandj1iare available; in 3D an addi-
tionally qudit value j2iis available.
In the game, each player is assigned a quantum state.
During gameplay, the quantum states will evolve when cards,i.e., quantum logic operations, are played on these states.
B. Cards
Playing cards is the only way to change a player’s quan-
tum state. During gameplay, the players can play cards either
on their own or other players states to manipulate the state.
An overview over the playable cards is given in Table I. The
detailed truth tables for all quantum gates can be found inthe instruction manual.
22The game also includes cards that
do not correspond to quantum operations, e.g., a steal cardthat allows a player to steal a card from another player. Note
further, that the choice of dimension affects the set of quan-
tum operations. In 2D, for example, only one X-gate isdeﬁned, whereas in 3D, two X-gates with different cyclicshifts exist. The cards do not form a universal set of gates.
C. Gameplay
The goal of the game is to play cards, i.e., quantum logic
operations, in such a way that the player’s own qudit value isas high as possible and the opponents’ values as low as pos-sible. An example gameplay where the players have alreadyplayed their cards is shown in Fig. 1.
The players can choose between three different difﬁculty
levels. To not overwhelm the players who do not have a solid
background in quantum information, it is recommended tostart the game in the Easy version. In this simpliﬁed 2D-
version, beginners can familiarize themselves with the rulesand basic quantum logic operations without the phase prop-erties of the operations, i.e., without the Y and Z gates andonly with a single Hadamard gate. The game is more com-
plex in the standard 2Dversion, in which the cards are added
that modulate the phase of single states, thus allowing theplayers to control quantum interference. In this version, allcards are used. Finally, the 3Dversion is played with three-
dimensional qudits; thus, it includes the most complexquantum states and the gameplay reaches its maximal
Table I. Overview of the playable cards and their consequences.
Actions Cards Description
Single-qudit gates I Identity operation. It does nothing.
X X-gate. It increases the qudit value by 1 (1 or 2 in 3D) cyclically.Y Y-gate. It acts like the X-gate with an additional phase shift.
Z Z-gate. It adds phase shifts to the state.
H Hadamard-gate. It generates a superposition of all possible qudit values with equal probabilities.
The game has 2 (3 in 3D) different Hadamard gates with different phase values.
Multi-qudit gates CX CX-gate. The CX operation is controlled by one qudit and acts as an X-gate on another.
SWAP SWAP-gate. Swaps the value of two qudits.
Other Cancel The card replaces a played quantum operation by an identity operation.
Steal The player can steal a card from another player, but must play it immediately.
459 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Kopf et al. 459 04 October 2023 22:52:57
difﬁculty. Here, the X, Y, and Z gates have two and the
Hadamard gates have three variations. More details on the
cards used in each version can be found in the manual.22
There are three game modes: competitive, cooperative,
and single-player. In the cooperative mode, the goal is not to
win against the other players but to reach the highest possible
values summed up over all qudits as a group. In the single-player mode, the player can solve six ready-made riddlesthat guide the player to discover speciﬁc quantum effects.
The riddles have different levels of difﬁculty, starting with
easy ones that help the player learn about quantum interfer-ence effects. The difﬁculty is then gradually increased, with
more quantum effects being gradually introduced. In addi-
tion, the signiﬁcance of each quantum effect in quantumcomputing is brieﬂy discussed along with the solution of the
riddle, such that students can put quantum operations in a
better context. Instructors can extend this set with their ownriddles. A detailed description and the riddle sheets are avail-
able in the supplementary material.
22
D. Strategies and quantum effects
To know what strategy to employ, a player must keep
track of the evolution of the state. Playing in the single-player mode will help players learn to keep track of the state,
and how it is changed by different cards. Furthermore, three
quantum effects can be used in different game strategies:
•Quantum superpositions, which demonstrate the probabil-istic nature of quantum measurements, i.e., quantumrandomness.
•Quantum interference, which demonstrates the effect of
phases on measurement outcomes.
•Quantum entanglement, which leads to strong correlations
between the measurement outcomes of different systems.
In the following, we give simple examples of how the three
effects can be observed in different game strategies. For sim-
plicity, we explain the effect in detail with qubits; however, the
high-dimensional counterparts follow in an analogous manner.1. Quantum superposition
A Hadamard gate acting on the quantum states j0iorj1i
generates a superposition of both states, as shown in Fig.
2(a). In the game, the software “collapses” the state by simu-
lating a measurement and gives the random outcome
weighted by the quantum probability. This quantum random-ness adds an element of luck to the gameplay. Additionally,
the superpositions can be used as a strategic element. For
example, if one of the players is leading the round, the otherscan reduce the leader’s chances of winning by setting them
into a superposition. When the game is played in the 3D ver-
sion, similar Hadamard operations can be performed, how-
ever, with the superposition having three possible outcomes.
Note that the variety of Hadamard gates only differ fromeach other in phase (see manual for more details
22), which
becomes important when considering interference effects.
2. Interference effects
The phase of a quantum state is a physical property which
does not have a direct effect on its qubit values. However, asit affects the outcome of quantum interference it can indi-
rectly be used to change the qubit value of a state. When
playing the game, it is possible to learn how to control inter-
ference through phase manipulations. Controlling phase is an
important underlying working principle of quantum compu-tations and almost always the reason behind its quantum
advantage. Let’s assume that we have a qubit j0ion which
we play two H
1-Hadamard operations. In this process, the
second Hadamard allows interference to occur, resulting in
the state j0iagain. If we add a Z-gate before or after the two
H1-gates, the outcome doesn’t change as the players state is
stillj0i. If, however, we ﬁrst play the H 1gate, then the Z-
gate, and then the second H 1-gate, the resulting state is j1i.
A quick look at the state evolution shows that after the ﬁrst
card, we obtain the superposition state 1 =ﬃﬃ ﬃ
2p
ðj0iþj1iÞ.
Then, the Z-gate changes the phase between the two terms,i.e., changes the state to 1 =ﬃﬃ ﬃ
2p
ðj0i/C0j1iÞ, which leads to the
ﬁnal state j1i, when another H
1-gate is applied. This state
evolution is outlined in detail in Fig. 2(b). Thus, with the
Fig. 1. (Color online) A possible gameplay with three-dimensional qudits and four players. Player 1 starts with the qudit value of j0iobtained in the ﬁrst round.
Players 2, 3, and 4, start with their qudit values of j2i;j1i, and j0i, respectively. The software on the right evaluates the winning state as j2;1;1;1i, where the
position of qudit values corresponds to the players. For a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms, the generated end state is also display ed on the
bottom of the window, before it was measured. The other possible outcomes can be found by inspecting the overall state. Here, the states j2;1;2;2iand
j2;1;0;0icould also have been obtained with the same probability.
460 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Kopf et al. 460 04 October 2023 22:52:57
phase, we can manipulate the evolution of a superposition to
obtain a desired state, thereby controlling the probability of
measuring it. In this way, the phase gates can be used to con-trol the state and the measurement outcome, through quan-tum interference. Interference effects can also be observed
when the game is played in 3D, where the increased com-
plexity of the states allows a larger variety of different phasemanipulations and interference effects. In this game, the Y,
Z, and Hadamard cards can be used to change the phase of a
quantum state. Interference effects are explored in a guidedmanner by the two easy riddles provided in the supplemen-
tary material for single-player game mode.
22
3. Quantum entanglement
Entanglement is another fundamental feature of quantum
mechanics. Quantum entanglement correlates the value of
one qubit with the value of another qubit. Counterintuitively,the correlations between entangled qubits still exist when
they are not in a single state, but a superposition. Hence,
when an entangled state is measured, the outcome ofentangled players will be random due to being in a superpo-
sition, but still perfectly correlated. By using quantum entan-
glement in the game, you can, for example, ensure that acertain opponent does not get more points than you, as in the
example in the next paragraph. A plethora of other possible
strategies open up when considering tuning the correlationthrough other gates, e.g., phase gates.
In a quantum computation process and, thus, in the game,
entanglement is generated by playing a Hadamard-gate and
consecutively a CX-gate on one qubit. As an example, let’sassume players 1 and 2 both have a qubit value of j0i, as dis-
played in Fig. 2(c). A Hadamard-card is played on qubit 1,
generating a superposition, i.e., the two-qubit state becomes1=ﬃﬃ ﬃ
2p
ðj0;0iþj1;0iÞ. Here, the position in the ket-vector
corresponds to the qubit number, e.g., the state jx;yirefers to
player 1 being in state xand player 2 in y. We then play a
CX-gate (X gate controlled by qubit 1 and targeting qubit 2),which results in the state 1 =ﬃﬃ ﬃ
2p
ðj0;0iþj1;1iÞ. This means,
that both players’ states will randomly have either the value
0, or 1 after a measurement is performed. However, due toentanglement, both qubits will always end up with the same
random value. The same entangling operation also works in
3D. In the single-player mode, the player is guided throughinstructive examples of entanglement in three different rid-
dles with varying difﬁculty.
IV. FEEDBACK AND FUTURE IMPROVEMENTS
First trials with graduate and undergraduate students have
shown good indications of the educational value of thegame. Discussions and self-reports of the participants afterplaying the game allowed us to draw the following conclu-
sions: Student understanding of quantum operations
improves considerably after only a few trial games. The stu-dents not only understood how the states were evolving but
they also conceived and tested better strategies to achieve
the highest possible qudit values to win the game. The posi-tive feedback shows promise for enhanced student involve-
ment in future quantum information courses. An enthusiastic
student, for example, stated that he “learned about quantumlogic in an engaging, fun way.” However, we also observed
that students without any background in quantum mechanics
struggled to develop better strategies. Hence, using the gamein undergraduate studies will require more time to introduce
the game and the basic concepts of quantum state and their
evolutions. We also note that a more controlled and
Fig. 2. (Color online) By playing the depicted cards, the players can explore superpositions, interference, and entanglement with qubits as describ ed in detail
in Sec. III D. The state after each cards operation is applied is written beneath it. (a) The Hadamard card is generating a qubit superposition of the state of
player 1. Player 1’s starting state j0iturns into 1 =ﬃﬃ ﬃ
2p
ðj1iþj0iÞ. (b) Quantum interference can be controlled by phase. Player 1’s value after the logic opera-
tions is j1i, Player 2’s is j0i. (c) Entangling the qubits of players 1 and 2. The starting state j0;0iis transformed to the entangled state 1 =ﬃﬃ ﬃ
2p
ðj1;1iþj0;0iÞ.
461 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Kopf et al. 461 04 October 2023 22:52:57
quantitative study would be needed to evaluate the educa-
tional effectiveness of the game.
The current version of the game explores some fundamen-
tal quantum mechanical effects by mimicking the operation
of a quantum computer. Other interesting quantum mechani-
cal effects, such as non-equally weighted states, are beyond
the scope of this game.
Although the ﬁrst trial games have given positive feed-
back overall, the game can be further improved. An addi-
tional operation that could be introduced to the game is a
state measurement card which measures the state of one ormore qudits, individually. This mechanism would add an
extra layer of complexity and would allow the game to intro-
duce simple quantum algorithms, such as superdense coding,quantum teleportation, or entanglement swapping.
V. CONCLUSION
Teaching quantum mechanical concepts is a challenging
task, because quantum mechanics is non-intuitive and per-
ceived to be highly demanding. To loosen up the atmo-
sphere and promote student engagement, methods from
gamiﬁcation can be applied. The strategic card game
Endless Fun in high dimensions offers multiple game
modes to facilitate learning new quantum computational
concepts. Additionally, the underlying fundamental quan-tum features, namely, randomness, superposition, interfer-
ence, and entanglement can be experienced and understood
in a quantum computing setting. Initial trial games with stu-
dents have shown the potential the game has for supporting
conventional teaching methods. Together with the evalua-
tion software, the card game is a powerful tool which is not
only suitable for players with background knowledge but
also for introducing players to quantum operations in an
easy-going way. Thus, it can also be used for outreach pur-
poses where interested laymen can experience fundamental
quantum physical features.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Stephen Plachta, Matias Eriksson,
Subhajit Bej, Marco Ornigotti, Mona Pulst, and Rupa
Kiran for feedback on the game, valuable suggestions, and
design support. The authors furthermore thank IlkkaKyl€anp€a€a for help in software-related questions. The
authors acknowledge the inventors of the card game
QjCards i: Oskari Kerppo, Jorden Senior, Sabrina
Maniscallo, Guillermo Garcia-Perez, Samuli J €a€askel €ainen,
Sylvia Smatanova, Krista Erkkil €a, and Elie Abraham. All
authors acknowledge ﬁnancial support from the Academy
of Finland through the Competitive Funding to Strengthen
University Research Proﬁles (Decision No. 301820) andthe Photonics Research and Innovation Flagship
(PREIN—Decision No. 320165). L.K. acknowledges
support from the Vilho, Yrj €o, and Kalle V €ais€al€a
Foundation of the Finnish Academy of Science and
Letters. M.H. acknowledges support from the Doctoral
School of Tampere University and the Magnus Ehrnrooth
foundation through its graduate student scholarship. R.F.
acknowledges support from the Academy of Finlandthrough the Academy Research Fellowship (Decision No.
332399).AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
a)Electronic mail: lea.kopf@tuni.ﬁ. ORCID: 0000-0002-7629-0492.
b)ORCID: 0000-0002-3496-7338.
c)ORCID: 0000-0002-7337-8755.
d)ORCID: 0000-0001-6251-753X
1Jonathan P. Dowling and Gerard J. Milburn, “Quantum technology: The
second quantum revolution,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London. Ser. A:
Math., Phys. Eng. Sci. 361(1809), 1655–1674 (2003).
2Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Ryan Babbush, Dave Bacon, Joseph C. Bardin,
Rami Barends, Rupak Biswas, Sergio Boixo, Fernando G. S. L. Brandao,
David A. Buell et al. , “Quantum supremacy using a programmable super-
conducting processor,” Nature 574(7779), 505–510 (2019).
3Han-Sen Zhong, Hui Wang, Yu-Hao Deng, Ming-Cheng Chen, Li-Chao Peng,
Yi-Han Luo, Jian Qin, Dian Wu, Xing Ding, Yi Hu et al., “Quantum computa-
tional advantage using photons,” Science 370(6523), 1460–1463 (2020).
4Daniele Cozzolino, Beatrice Da Lio, Davide Bacco, and Leif Katsuo
Oxenløwe, “High-dimensional quantum communication: Beneﬁts, progress,
and future challenges,” Adv. Quantum Technol. 2(12), 1900038 (2019).
5Yuchen Wang, Zixuan Hu, Barry C. Sanders, and Sabre Kais, “Qudits and
high-dimensional quantum computing,” Front. Phys. 8, 589504 (2020).
6Manuel Erhard, Mario Krenn, and Anton Zeilinger, “Advances in high-
dimensional quantum entanglement,” Nat. Rev. Phys. 2(7), 365–381 (2020).
7Sebastian Deterding, Dan Dixon, Rilla Khaled, and Lennart Nacke, “From
game design elements to gamefulness: Deﬁning ‘gamiﬁcation’,” in
Proceedings of the 15th International Academic MindTrek Conference:
Envisioning Future Media Environments (ACM, 2011), pp. 9–15.
8Juho Hamari, David J. Shernoff, Elizabeth Rowe, Brianno Coller, Jodi
Asbell-Clarke, and Teon Edwards, “Challenging games help students
learn: An empirical study on engagement, ﬂow and immersion in game-
based learning,” Computers Human Behav. 54, 170–179 (2016).
9Ming-Shiou Kuo and Tsung-Yen Chuang, “How gamiﬁcation motivates
visits and engagement for online academic dissemination—An empirical
study,” Computers Human Behav. 55, 16–27 (2016).
10Dimitrios Vlachopoulos and Agoritsa Makri, “The effect of games and
simulations on higher education: A systematic literature review,” Int. J.
Educ. Technol. Higher Educ. 14(22), 1–33 (2017).
11John Preskill, “Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond,”
Quantum 2, 79–99 (2018).
12Aditya Anupam, Ridhima Gupta, Azad Naeemi, and Nassim JafariNaimi,
“Particle in a box: An experiential environment for learning introductory
quantum mechanics,” IEEE Trans. Educ. 61(1), 29–37 (2017).
13Allan Goff, Dale Lehmann, and Joel Siegel, “Quantum tic-tac-toe, spooky-coins &
magic-envelopes, as metaphors for relativistic quantum physics,” in 38th AIAA/
ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit (ASME, 2002), p. 3763.
14Evert van Nieuwenburg, “Quantum TiqTaqToe,” 2019. <https://quantum-
tictactoe.com/ >
15QuantumRealmGames, “Quantum chess,” 2020. <https://quantumchess.net/ >
16Christopher Cantwell, “Quantum chess developing a mathematical frame-
work and design methodology for creating quantum games,” preprint
arXiv:1906.05836 (2019).
17Reinhard Friedemann, “Quantum minigolf,” 2011. <http://quantummini-
golf.sourceforge.net/index.html >
18Daniel Ratcliffe, “Qcraft,” 2013. <https://sites.google.com/a/elinemedia.-
com/qcraft/wiki/qcraft/blocks-and-items#TOC-Quantum-Ore >
19Maryam Ashoori, Justin D. Weisz, Aaron Cox, Michael L. Kenney, Jay M.
Gambetta, Jerry M. Chow, and Lev S. Bishop, “Entanglion—Open source
quantum board game,” 2018. <https://entanglion.github.io/ >
20Annakaisa Kultima and Sabrina Maniscalco, “Quantum wheel—Quantum
game jam,” 2019. <http://www.ﬁnnishgamejam.com/quantumwheel/ >
21Oskari Kerppo, Jorden Senior, Sabrina Maniscallo, Guillermo
Garcia-Perez, Samuli J €a€askel €ainen, Sylvia Smatanova, Krista Erkkil €a, and
Elie Abraham. “Q—cards,” 2019. <https://zhamul.itch.io/qcards >
22See supplementary material online for https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0062128 for card game instructions, cards, evaluation software, and rid-
dle sheets; Lea Kopf, Markus Hiekkam €aki, Shashi Prabhakar, and Robert Fickler,
“Endless fun high dimensions—A card game to program a high-dimensional
quantum computer,” Zenodo, 2020. <https://zenodo.org/record/7034144 >
23J€urgen Audretsch, Entangled Systems: New Directions in Quantum
Physics (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2008).
462 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Kopf et al. 462 04 October 2023 22:52:57
