
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2023
Essential climate change conversations for introductory
physics coursesa) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Abigail R. Daane ; Jesse Nof fsinger
Am. J. Phys.  91, 701–707 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0137210
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Assessment of the impact of the anthropogenic environment on children’ s health as a factor in
environmental justice
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2023)
Integrating Equity: Curricular Development and Student Experiences in an Intermediate-Level College
Physics Major Course
Phys. T each.  (November 2020)
The chicken and egg dilemma for Malaysian sustainable development plan against the economic
development in meeting SDG 13 goal
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2022) 04 October 2023 22:56:30
Essential climate change conversations for introductory physics
coursesa)
Abigail R. Daaneb)
South Seattle College, 6000 16th Ave. SW, Seattle, Washington 98106
Jesse Noffsingerc)
(Received 1 December 2022; accepted 14 July 2023)
Climate change issues have become far more complex and better studied over the last few years.
Making sense of how the causes and effects of climate change create a coherent framework can
empower learners to engage in productive discourse and to ask deeper questions. Historical
contexts, current approaches to mitigate climate change, and future demands are all a part of theongoing research and efforts. This global, social justice issue will only become more pressing, and
we need to support students in making informed decisions about their actions going forward. It is
for this reason that we (a physics instructor and an energy consultant) have joined together tocreate a list of topics that all students should consider as they move through our educational
programs.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0137210
I. INTRODUCTION
Climate change has been elevated in public discussions
over the past few decades. As society collectively realizesits associated impacts and the challenges that come withhigher levels of atmospheric emissions, it will becomeincreasingly important for all members of society to betterunderstand climate change. Yet, climate change is a broadtopic and can be approached from many angles in a class-
room. Even still, calculus-based introductory physics
courses rarely discuss crucial climate change issues.Physics instructors often choose to leave this topic to “non-science” majors or to elective courses, leaving a gap of cru-cial knowledge for STEM majors, who often end up in lead-ing roles in climate change mitigation. We risk makingphysics courses obsolete by not changing our content inclass to account for the needs of society around us. Today,exposing students to the pressing equity issues around cli-mate change is necessary, using both deontological andconsequential justiﬁcations. Students pursuing engineeringor computer science degrees, not to mention physics,should be reminded that their careers could be at the serviceof improving our prospects of future living. We urge phys-ics instructors to prioritize making space for conversationsand investigations about climate change, not as a separateclass, but as an overarching theme or weeklong focus of theintroductory physics classes. If time is an issue, many ofthese activities could be completed as online reﬂectionsand/or shorter weekly discussions spread throughout theterm. Many of the topics here are directly related to energyand electricity, so could easily be supplemental to contentalready present in physics courses. One way to approachthis is to think of what you as an instructor might do to con-solidate topics if you had to cancel class for snow days,
sick days, or even just a shorter number of class hours in a
given term—there is always room to squeeze or cut mate-rial! This opens space to include teaching broadly a bout cli-
mate change and also going deeper into aspects such ascauses, scientiﬁc modeling to understand future outcomes,adaptation and mitigation strategies, physical impacts onpeople, wildlife, and the environment, or even current andfuture social and economic impacts arising from climatechange. Common STEM lessons about climate change
include students measuring their carbon footprint, or learn-ing how CO
2becomes stuck in the atmosphere. While these
lessons are important, they only scratch the surface of what
today’s learners need to know to be climate change literate.
We urge introductory physics instructors to engage learnersin productive discourse and empower them to ask deeperquestions about how various aspects of climate change ﬁttogether and create a coherent framework with their physicscanon. It is for this reason that we (a physics instructor andan energy consultant) have co-created a list of discussiontopics and suggested activities that every student should
encounter as they move through introductory calculus-based physics programs. While this may be a bold claim,we posit that adjusting our current physics canon to includedirect teaching a bout climate change will make it more rel-
evant and better equip our students for future careers.
In Secs. IIandIII, we share activities to provide a founda-
tion for discussions about the current climate change efforts.
We have provided suggested curricular moves, straightfor-
ward answers, and some external resources, all serving as ajumping-off point for further investigation and analysis. Theﬁrst four questions are more commonly “covered” in second-ary education, and, thus, we expand more upon the latter ﬁveanswers. We also recognize that not all students come to theclassroom with the same knowledge. In our teaching context,introductory calculus-based physics students at a two-yearcollege in the Paciﬁc NW come to the classroom with awealth of knowledge about climate change and its effects ontoday’s society. In this context, the ﬁrst author has taughtthese activities across the ﬁrst three quarters of introductoryphysics, sometimes skipping the ﬁrst few questions because
of the students’ prior knowledge. Instructors who have stu-
dent populations in which there is little prior educationalexperience about climate change may need to provide morescaffolding and data to support student understanding of theﬁrst four questions. Finally, we recognize that limitationsexist for every teaching context. We offer up these activitiesas possibilities, hoping that each educator will use their ownexpertise and context to implement these suggestions fruit-fully (in terms of both breadth and scope) in theirclassrooms.
701 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 701 04 October 2023 22:56:30
II. STARTER QUESTIONS FOR CLIMATE
CONVERSATIONS
We recommend asking students to discuss the ﬁrst four
questions in small groups using a teaching tool called the jig-saw method. Here, each small group reads and discusses one
question and answer (15 min). If students need more scaf-
folding for their discussions, we recommend asking themprobing questions, such as “What do you notice?,” “Whatdoes your graph or example show?,” and “How is this con-
nected to your question?.” After identifying the main ideas
of the answer, students from each group recombine with onestudent from each of the other three groups to share their
puzzle pieces (25 min). This activity provides the opportu-
nity for students to teach and learn from each other.Following these small group conversations, a summary fromthe groups about their takeaways can build consensus
(20 min). These time estimates are approximate and also can
take into account transitions to and from groups.
A. Group 1: What do we mean by climate change?
When we discuss climate change in this paper, and in most
other situations, we focus on recent changes to the earth’s atmo-sphere, which are on average increasing global temperatures.
These changes have arisen since modern industrialization has
caused a dramatic step-change increase in per capita consump-tion of energy and economic output. Climate change, however,
is more than an increase in global average surface temperatures.
It is a broad term that encompasses effects such as sea levelrise, increased frequency and severity of weather events,droughts, and impacts to plants, wildlife, and humans.
Climate change is sometimes colloquially characterized by
the global average temperature increases we see today and we
(will likely) see in the future. Unfortunately, when we discusschanges of a “few degrees” of temperature, e.g., “we have
observed a 1.x degree change in global temperatures due to
human activity” it may not convey the scale of the impacts!This 1.x degree change is in contrast with familiar temperatureswings in a single day on the order of tens of degrees
Fahrenheit. Second, for people in the USA, the physical con-
nection is sometimes lost since 4
/C14Ci s/C247/C14F. Additionally, we
often describe a change representing an average global temper-
ature. This deﬁnitionally means that some parts of the world
will experience lesser temperature rises, and others will experi-ence greater increases. For instance, a 2
/C14C average increase is
likely to translate the hottest days in Spain being 9/C14Fw a r m e r .
Instructor actions
Instructor actions provide group 1 with the aforemen-
tioned paragraph and one or more graphs that show these
changes. NASA’s Global Climate Change website providesseveral graphs that are accessible, often updated, and free.1
We suggest using the Vital Signs: Global Temperature, SeaLevels, and Ocean Warming graphs for this group.
B. Group 2: What is causing climate change?
Anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions cause cli-
mate change. The atmosphere concentration of CO
2has
increased from pre-industrial levels by /C2450% as of 2021.2
Climate models have been developed which unequivocally link
atmospheric concentration of GHGs to an increase in global
temperatures and help to explain the mechanisms by which thisis occurring. These models often also enable researchers to
understand physical impacts from increased emissions.
Increased atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases inﬂu-
ences how energy from the sun is absorbed, which is the pri-mary pathway that leads to the effects discussed in this paper.
Instructor actions
Instructor actions provide group 2 with the aforemen-
tioned paragraph and a graphic on the global atmosphere
concentration of CO
2since the pre-industrial periods, avail-
able on NASA’s Global Climate Change website as one ofthe vital signs: carbon dioxide.1
If you have students interested in better understanding the
direct link between increased atmospheric concentrations of
GHGs and climate change, there is a great deal of research
and accessible materials available on the topic.3–5
C. Group 3: Why does climate change actually matter?
Perhaps a summertime increase in peak temperatures of 9/C14F
does not seem that extreme. However, climate change isalready causing noticeable and costly effects on people and our
surroundings, and many existing studies using climate models
and social analysis expect increasing negative outcomes. Someexamples include increasing frequency and severity of heatwaves, shifting regional growing seasons and crops that can be
grown, increasing severity of droughts leading to famines,
lengthening and intensifying wildﬁre seasons, migrating popu-lations away from unlivable regions, and even the starting ofconﬂicts which may be fought over the shifts in natural resour-
ces.
6These effects are a social justice issue: it is certain that
some people with fewer resources and in speciﬁc locations willbe negatively impacted much more than others.7Without enu-
merating all of the potential impacts, here is one speciﬁc exam-
ple to highlight how increases in temperature affects humans.
Example: Wet bulb temperature
Humans cool themselves primarily through sweat, and the
more humid the environment is, the less effective the body’sevaporative cooling is. In understanding a human’s ability towork outside in a hot environment, scientists often use the “wet
bulb temperature” to measure strain on humans: it describes a
humidity-adjusted temperature measurement. Wet bulb mea-surements are similar to weather outlooks where, e.g., “the hightemperature will be 85
/C14F, but will feel like 93/C14F due to 70%
humidity”. Recent research on human physiology and higher
temperatures has created more awareness for the urgency of thechallenge. A recent study8suggests that while a previously
accepted wet bulb ﬁgure for humans’ ability to work outside for
prolonged periods was 35/C14C( 9 5/C14F), it may actually be as low
as 31/C14C(/C2488/C14F). As the average global temperature increases,
it becomes more common to reach dangerous wet bulb tempera-tures regularly during warmer months. The downstream effect is
that it will be impossible to work outside for large periods of the
year. For societies that depend heavily on manual labor for theireconomic output, this could have a devastating impact on localeconomies and eventually lead to large-scale migrations.
Instructor actions
Instructor actions provide group 3 with the aforemen-
tioned paragraphs and the example explaining wet bulb tem-
perature as related to other weather measures.
702 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 A. R. Daane and J. Noffsinger 702 04 October 2023 22:56:30
D. Group 4: How do we think about global climate
targets?
To avoid the worst effects of climate change, leading voi-
ces have endorsed targets that would keep temperature rise
below 1.5/C14C relative to pre-industrial levels. Most policies
aim to reduce emissions. However, climate models do notdeﬁnitively link speciﬁc emissions levels to speciﬁc temper-ature outcomes. The messaging has proven useful for publicdiscussion and has provided a clear mandate for policy-makers to develop plans that are “1.5
/C14C compliant.”10The
2015 Paris Climate Agreement11solidiﬁed the 1.5/C14C target
and represents an aggressive but possible outcome.
As awareness of human-caused climate change has grown,
many international organizations have convened to work onaddressing the challenge. The conference of parties (COP)and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)are the most commonly referenced groups providing a forumand inputs into the global discussion on climate change.
For example, the IPCC aggregates, analyzes, and summa-
rizes scientiﬁc research to support governments and policy-makers in navigating climate topics.
9
Instructor actions
Instructor actions provide group 4 with the aforemen-
tioned paragraphs and a graph on emissions needed to meetthe 1.5
/C14C budget. We recommend ﬁgure SPM.4 from the
IPCC’s Sixth Assessment Report.12
III. MORE IN-DEPTH DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
FOR CLIMATE CONVERSATIONS
Students who have a basic understanding of the cause and
effect of climate change from previous experiences and/or discus-
sions of the aforementioned questions can now delve more deeplyinto the complexities surrounding the historical/current contextsand actions needed going forward. The next set of topics build oneach other and are best considered in chronological order. Werecommend using small group discussions and/or written reﬂec-tions to support learners in fully engaging with the topics below.
A. How do we measure the emissions that cause climate
change?
Most often we discuss the global average temperature
increase in different scenarios as a metric for understandingglobal climate change. However, the well understood causeof temperature increases is GHGs. The most common GHG
by both atmospheric concentration and emissions rate is car-bon dioxide, and its concentration is now /C2450% higher than
pre-industrial levels.
13Additionally, many other gases con-
tribute to climate change to a lesser degree, and their GHG
emissions are typically measured in carbon dioxide equiva-lents (CO
2E). CO 2e is measured in metric mass units. Table
Ishows some typical measures of CO 2e as well as what scale
of activity may result in that level of emissions.
Scientists have determined the relative and cumulative
impact of different gases’ emissions known as their GlobalWarming Potential (GWP14), where CO 2is used as the standard
of comparison.15Each GHG contributes to the CO 2E in relation
to its GWP. For example, one ton of methane released into theatmosphere has the same climate impact as about 30 tons ofCO
2added to the atmosphere over 100 years. Some commonly
tracked gases, example sources, and their GWP include:
•Carbon dioxide (CO 2), emitted in the combustion of fossil
fuels; GWP ¼1 (deﬁnition).
•Methane (CH 4, natural gas), coming predominantly from
agriculture as well as leaks in our oil and gas processes;
GWP¼27–30.
•Nitrous oxide (N 20), which also comes primarily from the
combustion of fossil fuels; GWP ¼298.
•Other gases containing ﬂuorine, such as hydroﬂuorocar-
bons (HFCs) that used to be common in aerosols, GWP insome cases >10 000.
Instructor actions
Instructors can ask students to read the aforementioned
paragraph, then share Table I, and ask students to answer the
following questions in small groups. Note that Question 4
involves using compounding growth and is signiﬁcantlymore challenging analytically.
(1) What stands out for you in Table I?
(2) Create an answer for a 1 megaton (Mt) action in Table I.
(3) At today’s emissions rate, how many years does the
world have before we exhaust the emissions budget of600Gt that puts us past a 1.5
/C14C threshold?
(4) Challenge Question: If we continue to increase emissions
at a rate of 2% per year, how many years before thethreshold is crossed?
(5) Calculate the equivalent CO
2E for a ﬂight from LA to
Seattle compared with driving the same distance. How
Table I. Amounts of CO 2E and order-of-magnitude scale of activity that produces that level of emissions.
CO 2E Actions that result in certain levels of CO 2E emissions
1 g The emissions from the electricity used in leaving an LED light bulb on for half an hour in California in 2021
1 kg Eating a fast-food hamburger or driving /C245 mi in a typical gasoline-powered sedan
1 ton (1000 kg) Flying round-trip on a trans-Atlantic commercial ﬂight (note that this is the allocated emissions for each passenger)1 kiloton (kt) Running a large-scale coal power plant for one hour1 megaton (Mt) Left as an exercise for the reader. Try to calculate using common carbon-intense energy actions in your everyday lives
(e.g., transportation, space heating/cooling, cooking, purchasing items that travel a great distance to the ﬁnal customer,
etc.). For example, this could be something like ﬂights /C2passengers /C2years.
1 gigaton (Gt) Emissions of all motor vehicles operated in the US for a full year/C2450 Gt The world’s emissions of CO
2E per year—this number has risen every year in modern history, with the exception of 2020
due to COVID-19 impacts. A preliminary estimate16of emissions in 2021 of 49.5 Gt is a slight increase from the 2020
value of 47.3 Gt, while 2022 estimates show a further increase is likely.17
/C24600 Gt The remaining carbon budget to stay within a 1.5 deg C scenario.
703 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 A. R. Daane and J. Noffsinger 703 04 October 2023 22:56:30
many fast-food burgers is the equivalent of that same
trip?
B. Where do emissions come from?
The rapid increases in emissions over the past /C24100 years
primarily arise from human-driven activities. Of the total
2021 global net emissions of /C2450 Gt, approximately 38 Gt
(75%) are energy-related, while the remaining 12 Gt come
from a mix of agricultural, process, and land-use activities
(see Table II).
Instructor actions
The data comprising emissions activities are complex. World
Resources Institute provides one visualization that supports
thinking about the complexity of our energy use.18This interac-
tive graph is from 2018. The numbers and explanations above
are from 2021. We recommend ﬁrst sharing the interactive
graph in small groups on computers (if possible). Students
should explore the graph and note what they noticed. Here are
a couple of possible discussion questions:
(1) What surprised you as a much bigger or smaller (com-
paratively) percentage than expected?
(2) What classiﬁcations do or do not ﬁt with your incoming
view of emissions activities? Next, instructors can high-
light that the data are not static by sharing the Table IIas
an additional resource. Ask students, what changed
between 2018 and 2021? What would you expect to con-
tinue to change?
As an alternative, more robust example lesson plan that
connects physics topics of energy transfers and transforma-
tions to these activities using energy resources, please refer
to Levy et al.19in the special edition.
D. Who is responsible for emissions?
Emissions are not produced equally across the globe, nor
is the measurement of emissions something that can beoverly simpliﬁed. Looking at different measurements can
tell a different story about the biggest emitters. For example
in Table III, China had the highest CO 2emissions of any
country in 2021 (11.5 Gt); however, on a per-capita basis,
China was the 38th highest emitter (8t/person/year). On a percapita basis, Qatar was the most emissions-intense country
(36t/person/year) but only accounted for 95 Mt (0.2% of
global emissions). While emissions have peaked in many
industrialized countries in the last 20–30 years, e.g., the US
peak annual emission was 6.1 Gt in 2007 but 5.0 Gt in 2021(/C018%), emissions are growing rapidly in emerging econo-
mies, e.g., China emitted 7.0 Gt in 2007 but 11.5 Gt in 2021
(þ64%).
20
Furthermore, if we look historically at total emissions
rather than the rate they were added to the atmosphere in the
recent past, we see another story. The largest contributors to
the world cumulative CO 2emissions output ( /C241700 Gt) are
the US (422 Gt, /C2424%) and European Union (27) (293 Gt,
/C2417%).20
Ultimately, it is the emissions entering the atmosphere
that matter, but some emissions provide a different societal
beneﬁt than others. For example, industrialized countries
that have already created favorable living conditions using
coal could be argued to have a responsibility to more aggres-sively make up for that past beneﬁt, thereby creating more
space for emerging nations to build their economies.
As noted earlier, not all emissions are tracked and
assigned at the ﬁnal end use. Emissions often do not happen
in the same place or time as the activity that really causedTable II. Global emissions categories and examples of each.
Emissions category Examples
Transportation (16%) On-road travel (passenger vehicles, commercial trucks, etc.), rail travel, air travel (commercial and pas-
senger), as well as marine (i.e., sea shipping).
Electric power generation (26%) The combustion of fossil fuels (coal, natural gas, and oil) is used to turn a turbine either directly or
through the heating of water into steam.
Energy-intensive industrial processes (30%) Fossil fuel combustion supplies energy to heat all manner of commodities for production. For example,
cement production requires not only a large amount of heat but also a chemical reaction, which turns cal-
cium carbonate into lime and carbon dioxide, the latter of which dissipates into the atmosphere. This reac-
tion alone accounts for about 3% of global emissions annually. Note that there is substantial electricity
used to drive processes in many industries (e.g., motors and pumps), but those emissions are tracked inthe power generation sector.
Buildings (7%) Fossil fuel combustion heats spaces, water, and supplies energy for cooking. Like industry, buildings also
consume large amounts of electricity.
Agriculture and land use (21%) Emissions from agriculture are produced in many ways, such as methane emitted from animals and
manure, nitrous oxide from fertilizers, and fossil fuels used to power farming equipment.
Land use-related net emissions have historically been negative in the United States, but much higher in
many developing regions of the world. This area of emissions tracking is where we account for planting
trees as well as deforestation. The US has increased the amount of carbon stored in forestlands consis-tently in the past decades (which comes from the atmosphere), while we have seen a large reduction in
forest cover in places like the Amazon in Brazil where old-growth forests are cleared to allow the land to
be used for economic activity. The carbon stored in plants is released into the atmosphere.
Table III. Various CO 2Emissions Statistics for China, Qatar, and the USA.
CountryEmissions in
2007 in
GigatonsEmissions in
2021 in
Gigatons2021 tons/
person/yearTotal Cumulative
Emissions
in Gigatons
China 7.0 11.5 8 249
Qatar 0.063 0.095 36 2.16USA 6.1 5.0 15 417
704 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 A. R. Daane and J. Noffsinger 704 04 October 2023 22:56:30
them. For example, cooking on a gas stove directly creates
emissions from a home, while the electricity used to heat
food in a microwave is usually a source of emissions farther
away (but at the same point in time) due to a power plantburning coal or gas. Even further aﬁeld, emissions were cre-
ated in the manufacture and shipment of the microwave and
stove to the house in the ﬁrst place. We do not want to countthe same emission multiple times, but we do want to under-
stand the activities that drive emissions. Thus, a nomencla-
ture has been developed to track these: scope 1 (on site),scope 2 (from electricity), and scope 3 (from making and
transporting). One company’s scope 1 emissions might be
another person’s scope 2 emissions and so on.
Instructor actions
Instructor actions ask students how should we think about a
country’s present vs. cumulative past emissions in terms oftheir responsibility to reduce emissions quickly and to help
others do so? Students can write an answer, pair up, and share
their ideas, and then some groups can share out in a wholeclass discussion. Note that for this conversation, there is not a
generally accepted answer, and ideas of equity, fairness, and
resources can make the discussion both engaging and poten-tially difﬁcult. It may be helpful to do a reminder of class
agreements or norms prior to this particular question. For addi-
tional support in preparing to talk about issues of equity inphysics, see resources found on the Underrepresentation
Curriculum website: www.underrep.com .
E. What is currently being done to reduce the rate
of emissions?
Not enough, yet! As mentioned in question four earlier,
targets to reduce emissions exist in many parts of the world,
but setting a target is not an action that reduces emissions.Innovation has helped to develop and deploy technologies
that replace emitting processes, while behavior change is
adding to the momentum in some cases. We highlight tech-
nologies that have led to real-world emissions reductions inTable III. This is not an exhaustive list but should help to
contextualize the type and scale of emissions being
addressed. These technologies (and future design) are criticalin the effort to address emissions, and still, it is important to
note that not all emission reductions must come from tech-
nology innovation.
Instructor actions
For this table, we recommend creating a card sort of the
categories and common sources of emission reduction in
Table IV, splitting each bolded emissions reduction approach
into its own card. Students in small groups can sort the cardsand then share their ideas with another group or do a gallery
walk to see how other groups arranged the cards. This gives
students a chance to engage in the ideas and also providesthe information up front. An additional column of data might
include the percentages given in Table IIand/or including
both the sources and the solutions for reduction.
F. What needs to be done?
We need to reduce the rate of emissions. We need innova-
tion coupled with all of the activities that accompany a mas-
sive shift in how we create and consume energy. There aremany pathways outlined by many organizations on what the
trajectories to a 1.5
/C14C outcome may look like. Most of them
follow a general theme: Address the low-hanging fruit ﬁrstand electrify as much energy use as possible, while decar-
bonizing electricity generation at the same time. In parallel,
non-energy emissions will need to come down substantially,
Table IV. Emissions category and sources.
Emissions category Common sources of emissions reductions
Transportation Electric vehicles have begun to replace some gasoline and diesel-powered vehicles
Efﬁciency improvements in fossil-driven vehicles improve the distance that can be covered with the same amount
of fuel
Electric power generation New construction of power generation facility has included increasingly large fractions of low carbon alternatives
withsolar and wind power being the largest and growing segment
Energy-intensive industrial processes Electriﬁcation of heating , e.g., replacing a gas boiler with a heat pump, has just recently started to scale up
Energy efﬁciency measures to reduce the total energy need through, e.g., process adjustments have long been a
way to reduce not only emissions but also costs for manufacturers
Buildings Electriﬁcation to replace natural gas use, e.g., space and water heating as well as cooking is becoming more
common. Much higher efﬁciency heat pumps have been developed, while induction ranges are beginning to
replace gas in some kitchens
Energy efﬁciency has been a major contributor as well and includes things like improving insulation and replacing
appliances and light bulbs with ones that use substantially less energy
Behavioral changes that include emissions reductions that actually change how energy is used have had an
impact. High energy prices and/or access to automation (e.g., smart thermostats and motion-sensor driven lighting)helps create these reductions
Agriculture Substitution of meat with plant-based proteins has picked up substantially over the past few years
Behavioral change wherein consumers just decide to eat foods which are on average less emissions intense, e.g.,
moving to a more plant-based diet
Land Use Forest management , tree planting, and afforestation
Non-energy process emissions Processes have been developed that reduce emissions in some industries , but the approaches and technologies
are extremely varied and industry-speciﬁc. For example, steelmaking with a blast furnace using coal is an
emissions-intense activity. However, it is possible instead to use electric arc furnaces with either recycled steel or
direct reduced iron (which can be made using clean hydrogen).
21
705 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 A. R. Daane and J. Noffsinger 705 04 October 2023 22:56:30
but the actions are a bit more difﬁcult to turn into a message
that is easy to convey in a short sound bite.
Some effort has already been done, and real emissions
reductions have been achieved vs a hypothetical baseline
without the actions discussed in Question 8. However, the
scale of those reductions is not yet enough, nor are all the
needed technologies seemingly ready for deployment to
bring society anywhere close to a 1.5/C14C outcome.
For each of the emissions categories, some set of technolo-
gies exist or are in development, which can address a largefraction of the challenge. Given the gap between where we
are and where we need to end up, there is a tremendous
opportunity for scientists, engineers, and others to not only
participate but also truly drive a more sustainable future.
Each of the following areas needs more innovative, creative,
and passionate people to move forward and help unlock pro-
gress. Myriad opportunities exist for each of us to get (more)
involved.
Advocacy, which can push the government and those with
the ability to make decisions to put in place policies andrules that encourage a more sustainable and equitable world,
is very important. Advocacy in the climate space should be
considered broadly and needs to center the impacts on our
most vulnerable members of society to ensure the least
amount of damage.
A historic example of a policy that materially impacted
efforts to mitigate climate change occurred in the solar
industry, creating support mechanisms for its scale-up. The
cost to produce electricity from a solar panel is much lower
today than it was 10–20 years ago. Much of the reason forthat comes from some countries deciding to buy and build
large-scale solar farms at a relatively high cost. However, by
creating demand for the panels, large manufacturing sites
were set up, and workforces learned how to install them efﬁ-
ciently. As a result of a policy to build low carbon power at a
high cost, cheap low carbon power is now available across
the globe.
More research and engineering can unlock faster decar-
bonization and address hard-to-abate emissions. All technol-
ogies can be improved through fundamental research, for
example, aerodynamics of wind turbine blades can improve
energy capture, different battery chemistries will make packs
lighter and able to cycle many more times, and new materials
and design will improve the efﬁciency of heat pumps and
allow them to operate in much colder environments. There
also exists a long list of cutting-edge technologies that high-
light additional work needed to create at-scale emissions
reductions. A few examples from a non-exhaustive list
include fusion reactors, carbon capture, hydrogen-poweredvehicles, and long-duration energy storage.
Scaling up manufacturing is needed. For example, many
more solar panels, wind turbines, and battery packs need to
be made to support a major energy transition. The scale of
facilities as well as the sheer number requires considerable
engineering support.
Increased construction and build-out of the entire infra-
structure are required. This will include clean energy produc-
tion sites, electricity networks to support electriﬁcation,rethinking and rebuilding city layouts, and pipelines to trans-
port CO
2and hydrogen. All of this will be at a massive scale
and require engineering; one can imagine that building a
power transmission line across desert vs. mountainous
regions is a very different activity.Personal changes can play a number of roles in reducing
emissions. Consumer decisions such as driving an electricvehicle, signing up for a “green” electricity plan, or eating
plant-based proteins help send signals to businesses that
encourage more investment in lower carbon products. Smalldaily changes such as turning off the lights when leaving aroom do not have a major emissions reduction effect
(although it is not zero!), but they do help keep the topic
front-and-center. This makes engaging in a climate dialoguemore frequent and natural, similar to an awareness cam-paign. Talking about climate change with others, whether ina classroom or a more informal setting, helps to increase
knowledge of the topic. This does not have to be large scale
(although that would be great as well). Instructors can intro-duce energy and carbon emissions into a short lesson such as(omitted for conﬁdential review). By increasing the volume
of discussion on climate and climate impacts, individuals
can raise the importance of climate policy to decision-makers and help to shift the behaviors of others. Individualsshould consider not only climate change effects on their localcommunities but also how those actions affect others who
may be more vulnerable throughout the world. Finally, and
perhaps most importantly, every action listed earlier origi-nates with individuals. Focusing a career path or volunteer-ing time to work on climate technologies, policymaking, or
advocacy is a signiﬁcant personal action that can impact the
trajectory of climate change.
Instructor actions
This ﬁnal question can serve as part of an out-of-class
reﬂection. Ask students to read the aforementioned questionand response. Then, students can write a reﬂection in
response to the reading. Here are a few optional prompts:
(1) What are the energy targets for your state and the United
States? Are we on track to reach those targets? Who arethe most vulnerable in your geographical location? Writeto your representatives across local and national govern-
ment and advocate for yourself and others who are and
will be affected negatively by climate change.
(2) Think about what you can do about this world crisis.
Remember every bit of energy matters! Write out abrainstormed list of small and large actions you can take.
(3) Which of the aforementioned actions could you see your-
self pursuing in the immediate and longer term? What
are some steps you can take to improve the effort? Who
can you talk to or work with to take action?
IV. CONCLUSION
Imagine what kinds of changes we as instructors could
make if we all started teaching about climate change in every
class; the ripple effects to career choices, private discourse,consumer decisions, and public awareness may be quitelarge. If each student who enrolls in the calculus-based intro-
ductory physics courses had the opportunity to learn more
about climate change, we might stand a chance at solvingthis problem sooner. Our classes need to be updated toinclude preparation for the current global issues. Just like cli-mate change itself, learning about climate change is a collec-
tive challenge where individual actions may seem small, but
a solution is only possible through a collection of individualactions.
706 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 A. R. Daane and J. Noffsinger 706 04 October 2023 22:56:30
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the
environment, sustainability, and climate change.
b)ORCID: 0000-0001-7444-7129.
c)ORCID: 0009-0006-7279-3718.
1Earth Science Communications Team, see <https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-
signs/carbon-dioxide >for “‘Vital Signs’ NASA’s Jet Propulsion
Laboratory.”
2National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, see <https://www.
noaa.gov/news-release/carbon-dioxide-now-more-than-50-higher-than-pre-
industrial-levels >for “Carbon Dioxide Now More Than 50% Higher Than
Pre-Industrial Levels (2022).”
3S. McCartney, A. Mehta, A. Ruane, and D. Bader, “ Introduction to NASA
Resources for Climate Change Applications (NASA Applied Remote
Sensing Training Program, Washington, D.C., 2021).
4Mark Lynas, Benjamin Z. Houlton, and Simon Perry, “Greater than 99%consensus on human caused climate change,” Environ. Res. Lett. 16(11),
114005 (2021).
5Zeke Hausfather, Henri F. Drake, Tristan Abbott, and Gavin A. Schmidt,
“Evaluating the performance of past climate model projections,” Geophys.
Res. Lett. 47(1), e2019GL085378, https://doi.org/10.1029/2019GL085378
(2020).
6Barry S. Levy and Jonathan A. Patz, “Climate change, human rights, andsocial justice,” Ann. Glob. Health 81(3), 310–322 (2015).
7Marshall Burke, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel, “Climate and
conﬂict,” Annu. Rev. Econ. 7(1), 577–617 (2015).
8Daniel J. Vecellio, S. Tony Wolf, Rachel M. Cottle, and W. Larry Kenney,
“Evaluating the 35/C14C wet-bulb temperature adaptability threshold for
young, healthy subjects,” J. Appl. Physiol. 132(2), 340–345 (2022).
9Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, see <https://www.ipcc.ch/
report/ar6/wg2/ >for “Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability” (2022).
10Climate targets generally refer to a plan to reduce annual additional emis-
sions rates versus a pre-deﬁned baseline. In many cases, climate targets
are set at the country level; however, many states, jurisdictions, and even
companies have set their own climate targets, while the European coun-
tries in the EU-27 have put forward climate targets and policies
collectively.11United Nations Framework: Convention on Climate Change, see <https://
unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement >
for “The Paris Agreement.”
12Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, see <https://www.ipcc.
ch/report/ar6/wg3/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGIII_FullReport.pdf >
“Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change” (2022).
13As of 2021, the average atmospheric concentration of CO 2was 415 parts
per million (ppm), which is /C2450% higher than the value of 280 ppm,
which has been measured from the late 1700s pre-industrial levels.Retrieved from: Carbon Brief, “Met Ofﬁce: Atmospheric CO
2now hitting
50% higher than pre-industrial levels” from <https://www.carbonbrief.
org/met-ofﬁce-atmospheric-co2-now-hitting-50-higher-than-pre-industrial-
levels/>(Retrieved March 6, 2023).
14EPA, see <https://www.epa. gov/ghgemissions/understanding-global-
warming-potentials >for “Understanding Global Warming Potentials”
(Retrieved November 29, 2022).
15Here, we are showing the 100 year equivalency values, which are com-monly used in the United States, as reported by the US EnvironmentalProtection Agency. The 20 year equivalency values, GWP20, are higherfor shorter-lived gases such as methane at 81–83 vs the GWP100 value of27–30.
16Alfredo Rivera, Kate Larsen, Hannah Pitt, and Shweta Movalia,see <https://rhg.com/research/preliminary-us-emissions-2021/ > for
“Preliminary US Greenhouse Gas Emissions Estimates for 2021, RhodiumGroup” (2022).
17IEA, see <https://www.iea.org/news/defying-expectations-co2-emissions-
from-global-fossil-fuel-combustion-are-set-to-grow-in-2022-by-only-a-
fraction-of-last-year-s-big-increase >for “Defying Expectations, CO 2
Emissions From Global Fossil Fuel Combustion Are Set to Grow in 2022
by Only a Fraction of Last Year’s Big Increase” (2022).
18World Resources Institute, see <https://www.wri.org/data/world-green
house-gas-emissions-2018 >for “World Greenhouse Gas Emissions:
2018” (Retrieved March 6, 2023).
19Elissa Levy, Abigail Daane, and Leslie Chamberlain, “An energy unit
fueled by climate change,” in this Special issue on teaching about the envi-ronment, sustainability, and climate change in The Phys. Teach. (2023).
20Hannah Ritchie, Max Roser, and Pablo Rosado, see <https://ourworldindata.
org/co2-and-other-greenhouse-gas-emissions >for “CO 2and Greenhouse
Gas Emissions” (2020).
21Zhiyuan Fan and S. Julio Friedmann, “Low-carbon production of iron andsteel: Technology options, economic assessment, and policy,” Joule 5(4),
829–862 (2021).
707 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 A. R. Daane and J. Noffsinger 707 04 October 2023 22:56:30
