
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| AUGUST 01 2022
Exam problems that link physical concepts with electrical
phenomena in living cells 
Vadim Shlyonsky ; Bertrand de Prelle ; Florian Bodranghien ; Don Patrick Bischop ; David Gall
Am. J. Phys.  90, 587–593 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0075228
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Physics Exams that Promote Collaborative Learning
Phys. T each.  (January 2014)
How accurately can students estimate their performance on an exam and how does this relate to their
actual performance on the exam?
AIP Conference Proceedings  (February 2012)
Smart exam monitoring system
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2021) 04 October 2023 23:13:57
Exam problems that link physical concepts with electrical phenomena
in living cells
Vadim Shlyonsky,a)Bertrand de Prelle, Florian Bodranghien, Don Patrick Bischop,
and David Gall
Laboratoire d’Enseignement de la Physique, Facult /C19ed eM /C19edecine, Universit /C19e libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles,
Belgium
(Received 14 October 2021; accepted 2 May 2022)
We present a collection of biophysics examination problems that focus on electrodiffusion, the
superposition principle, and currents in RC circuits, leading towards an understanding of the
Hodgkin–Huxley model of action potentials. These problems link basic concepts in electricity tothe physiology of living cells. The models described in these problems are intended help students
develop an understanding of electrical processes in cells. Our work shows how introductory-level
electricity courses can be taught in parallel with basic cell (electro)physiology and how basicconcepts of electric circuits apply to cellular phenomena.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0075228
I. INTRODUCTION
In this paper, we present a selection of examination prob-
lems that were used in a course on biophysics taught formore than a decade to undergraduate students at the Faculty
of Medicine of the Universit /C19e libre de Bruxelles. This course
covers the physical/electrical principles underlying restingmembrane phenomena and membrane excitation in livingcells. It is taken by second-year premedical and biomedicalscience students who have already studied both introductory
physics and calculus for one year, and a similar course could
be appropriate for biomedical engineering students. Theproblems help to illustrate the concepts that we present inthis course. They may be of interest not only to instructors ofsimilar courses but also to instructors in more standard phys-
ics courses who wish to include problems with biological
relevance.
It should be noted that there is no particular textbook that
covers exactly all of the topics of the course; a speciﬁc text-book has been written for our students (in French) and is freelyavailable upon request. The problems selected for this paperare arranged to follow the course syllabus. We begin with elec-
trostatics and electrodiffusion and then advance to increasingly
complex equivalent electrical circuits of biological membraneswhile progressively summarizing physiologically relevantelectrical phenomena and concepts. The ﬁnal aim of the courseis to present the Hodgkin–Huxley model of cell excitability.
This is a mathematical model in which cellular electrical phe-
nomena are represented by a set of three nonlinear differentialequations whose time-dependent solutions explain how electri-cal signals (i.e., action potentials) are generated in neurons.
The structure and complexity of these problems are
conﬁgured to make the ﬁnal examination a “learning by syn-
thesis” according to Bloom’s taxonomy.
1During the semes-
ter, problems of similar complexity are assigned to studentsas open-book homework. Students are taught to drawsketches of problems or to complete already available onesto facilitate understanding. They can also meet instructors
for additional guidance.
The overall goal of this type of learning is to show students
that simple equivalent electrical circuits and basic knowledgeof their functioning provide a foundation for modeling thenatural processes governing resting and excitable cellmembrane behavior. The term “excitable cell” describes a liv-
ing cell whose plasma membrane contains voltage-dependent
ion channels responsible for ﬁring action potentials beyond a
certain threshold membrane voltage value. As in any science,
biophysical models are designed to match observations in thelimits ﬁxed by measuring instruments. To reinforce this, we
offer learning-objective based comments on each problem in
order to link its model with actually measured examples of cel-
lular electrical phenomena or with experimental approaches
routinely employed in electrophysiology. To this end, many
problems have been modiﬁed by introducing conceptual ques-
tions requiring answers in everyday language. These questionsmay be given as homework, but they are omitted on written
examinations due to time limitations. The models for these
exam questions are created to be as simple as possible (with
the least number of components) while mimicking a broad
range of natural phenomena. In other words, they are based on
ideal conditions and their equivalent circuits but do not contain
details of real voltage/current clamp experiments such as thosethat lead to the artefacts related to Ag/AgCl-electrode poten-
tials, liquid-junction potentials, or series resistance compensa-
tion, all of which are common issues in electrophysiology but
not essential in our biophysics course. (Here, “Clamp” means
that whole circuit is held at either a ﬁxed voltage or ﬁxed totalcurrent.) Consequently, these problems are not suitable for a
pure electrophysiology class.
We hope that by becoming familiar with formulating cell
behavior via simple electrical models, students will develop
insights, which will be useful for future applications of bio-
physics in medicine, biology, and biomedical technology. In
our opinion, this is an original approach in life-sciences curric-
ula as introductory physics and physiology are rarely taughttogether. This collection has been screened against available
didactic literature on the same topic, and only original exam-
ples are included.
2–9Less-relevant problems or problems of
lower difﬁculty can be found in many excellent textbooks with
end-of-chapter tutorial questions.10–23During examinations,
students are given the following list of physical constants :
k¼1/(4pe0)¼9.0/C2109Nm2C/C02,l0¼4p/C210/C07Tm A/C01,
R¼8.314 J mol/C01K/C01,F¼96 500 C mol/C01,mproton ¼1.6726
/C210/C027kg,qproton ¼þ 1.601 /C210/C019C, and NA¼6.022
/C21023. These symbols will be used without deﬁnition in the
587 Am. J. Phys. 90(8), August 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 587 04 October 2023 23:13:57
problems below. Full analytic solutions of the problems can be
found in the supplementary material.27
II. PROBLEMS
The selected problems are grouped into subsections,
although these groupings are somewhat arbitrary due to the
broad nature of the problems. Answers to some questions are
given in [square brackets].
A. Electrodiffusion
The following two problems demonstrate the practical
application of differential expressions to ﬁnd solutions of
physics/physiology problems in simpliﬁed conditions. The
learning goals are twofold. First, we want to have studentsunderstand that simple biophysical problems can be solved
analytically and that graphical representations can help sim-
plify the analyses. Second, we focus on negative signs in thedifferential equations. By convention, it is required to negate
derivatives, because slope values are always opposite to the
direction of ﬂux of positively charged particles. That is, thenet ﬂow of charged particles is in the direction of free energy
minimization, i.e., from high to low concentration or voltage,
so the mass ﬂow is proportional to the negative derivative ofthe concentration/voltage. Since current is deﬁned as the
direction of positive charge ﬂow, it is also proportional to
the negative derivative of the concentration/voltage. Theseproblems would be far more challenging if the equations arenot given in the text.
Problem 1. In one dimension, the electrical current density
I
S(A/cm2) corresponding to the movement of ions Sunder
the inﬂuence of a concentration gradient is given by Fick’slaw
I
S¼/C0zSFD SdCSxðÞ
dx; (1)
where zSis the valence of the ion S,DSis its diffusion coefﬁ-
cient, and CS(x) is the concentration of Sin one dimension.
Consider a steady state where the number of Cl/C0ions per
liter of solution at x¼0c mi s1 023; this density decreases lin-
early to zero at x¼10 cm.
(a) Calculate current density ISatx¼2 cm if the diffusion
coefﬁcient is 10/C05cm2/s. [/C01.602 /C210/C05A/cm2]
(b) What is the direction of electrical current under these
conditions? In which direction do Cl/C0ions move under
these conditions?
(c) Based on your answer to (b), what is the purpose of the
negative sign in Fick’s law?
Problem 2. In one dimension, the electrical current density
IS(A/cm2) corresponding to the movement of ions Sunder
the inﬂuence of an electrical ﬁeld is given by
IS¼/C0F2z2
SDS
RTCSxðÞdV xðÞ
dx; (2)
where zSis the valence of the ion S,DSis its diffusion coefﬁ-
cient, Tis the absolute temperature, CS(x) is the concentra-
tion of Sat the point x, and V(x) is the potential associated
with the presence of an electrical ﬁeld. Consider a stationarystate where the only permeant ions present in the solution are
calcium ions. The solution is homogenous, its concentrationis 1 mol/l, and the temperature is 25
/C14C. The electric potential
atx¼0 cm is 10 V, and it decreases linearly to zero at
x¼5c m .
(a) Calculate the current density ISatx¼2 cm if the diffu-
sion coefﬁcient is 10/C05cm2/s.½0:3A=cm2/C138
(b) What is the direction of the electrical current under
these conditions? In which direction do calcium ions
move under these conditions?
(c) Based on your answer to (b), what is the purpose of the
negative sign in the differential equation?
Students next learn that transmembrane diffusion of ions
can be modeled as diffusion in one dimension. That is elec-
trodiffusion through a biological membrane in the presence
of both ionic gradient and electric ﬁeld is described by the
Nernst–Planck equation for one dimension, which is simply
the combination of the diffusion equations in the above
problems
Is¼/C0DsFzsdCxxðÞ
dxþzsCsF/C1dV xðÞ
RT/C1dx/C18/C19
: (3)
Its analytic solution in the case of one permeant ion at elec-
trochemical equilibrium (i.e., when the membrane current is
zero) gives the Nernst equation and, thus, allows calculation
of the electrochemical equilibrium potential of this ion
Es¼RT
zsFlnCs;out
Cs;in: (4)
In the case of several permeant ions, the solution to the
Nernst–Planck equation leads, with some strong assump-
tions, to the resting (reversal) membrane potential equation,
which is known to electrophysiologists as the Goldman–
Hodgkin–Katz (GHK) equation.24Some of these assump-
tions are not entirely physically justiﬁed; for example, that
the electric ﬁeld within a biological membrane is constant,
but are made for sake of simplicity. For solutions containing
only monovalent cations Mþand monovalent anions A/C0,i t
takes the following form:
Em¼RT
FlnXn
iPMþ
iMþ
i/C2/C3
outþXm
jPA/C0
jA/C0
j/C2/C3
in
Xn
iPMþ
iMþ
i/C2/C3
inþXm
jPA/C0
jA/C0
j/C2/C3
out0
BBBBB@1
CCCCCA:(5)
A “permeability” factor ðP
Mþ
iandPA/C0
jÞis introduced, and
students learn that the system, in which ion transport is gov-
erned by permeabilities expressed in cm/s, shows a rectifying
behavior and, thus, deviates from linearity. However, under
symmetrical ionic conditions (that is, where the concentra-
tion of each ion is the same on both sides of the membrane),
the GHK current equation closely approximates Ohm’s law
and, thus, can eventually describe linear behavior of the
membrane current.
Problem 3. Consider an electrically passive cell with ionic
concentrations [Naþ]ext¼140 mM, [Naþ]int¼10 mM,
[Kþ]int¼150 mM, and [Kþ]ext<150 mM. The temperature
is 25/C14C.
(a) If the ion ﬂuxes through the membrane of this cell in
both directions (int-to-ext and ext-to-int) were
588 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Shlyonsky et al. 588 04 October 2023 23:13:57
calculated using permeability coefﬁcients (Eq. (6)
below), would the current through the membrane obeyOhm’s law under these conditions?
U
s¼Psz2
sVmF2
RTCs½/C138: (6)
(b) If the cell membrane is permeable only to potassium
ions and if the membrane potential is /C075 mV, what is
the extracellular potassium concentration? ½8:08 mM /C138
(c) If the membrane is permeable to both cations and the
permeability ratio P K/PNais 100, ﬁnd the extracellular
concentration of potassium ions such that the observedmembrane potential is depolarized by 10 mV comparedto the membrane that is purely permeable to K
þunder
the same conditions. [ ﬃ2:94 mM /C138
Further ideas for electrodiffusion problems can be drawn
from Ref. 2(Chapter 3: problems 1–10, 23, 26), Ref. 7(Sec.
6: problem 25 and Sec. 9: problems 14–17), and Ref. 9
(Chapter 14: problems 3–5).
B. Cellular RC circuits in stationary states
While electrodiffusion problems do not formally require
an equivalent circuit diagram in order to be solved, such adiagram becomes essential in all following problems. The
key model element of virtually any type of biological mem-
branes is an RC-circuit as shown in Fig. 1.
This circuit contains membrane capacitance C
min parallel
with different branches consisting of ionic conductances(g
Na,gK, and leak conductance g l) in series with their corre-
sponding Nernst electrochemical equilibrium potentials(V
Na,V K, and V l). Depending on the problem, additional
branches may be present, for example, to account for ﬂuxesof the calcium or chloride ions. The membrane potential V
m
is determined as a difference between intracellular and extra-cellular potentials V
inand V outwith the latter set to zero by
convention since the extracellular node is grounded. In some
cases, students are forced to make a hypothesis about the
direction of current ﬂow in the circuit; this type of activity isone of our learning objectives. Students should be able tocorrectly interpret the text of the problem in order to identify(if it is not explicit) in which state the RC circuit is found.One possible state is a steady state where the membranecapacitor is fully charged and no further variation of mem-brane potential occurs. A second possible state is a pseudo-steady state occurring at the brief moment when the timederivative of the membrane voltage ( dV/dt) changes sign
such as when the action potential peaks. Finally, we canhave a non-steady state where the variations of potential onthe membrane capacitor give non-zero capacitive currents,as these variations are superposed on the resting membranevoltage. The correct interpretation determines the correctdirection of reasoning and, hence, the choice of formulas.
In the following problem, we begin by building a model
of a biological membrane, which we represent with an equiv-alent circuit where the membrane capacitor is present but isnot involved in solving the problem because the situation issteady-state. Here, students should demonstrate in a literalform exactly how the resting membrane voltage (hence, insteady state) depends on the ionic gradients, which are repre-sented by Nernst potentials V
1andV2, and also on the corre-
sponding membrane resistances governed by different ionchannels. Students should understand that membrane poten-tial is a result of a competition between conductances, wherethe highest conductance always wins and pulls the mem-brane voltage to the equilibrium value found in its circuitbranch.
Problem 4. Figure 2represents a cell membrane in a rest-
ing state; the membrane capacitor (C
m) is charged. The
membrane contains two different ionic conductances (corre-sponding to resistances R
1andR2) having different equilib-
rium potentials represented by voltage generators V1andV2.
(a) Calculate the stationary membrane capacitor potential
Vmas a function of V1,R1,V2, and R2.½Vm¼ðV2R1
þV1R2Þ=ðR1þR2Þ/C138
(b) Show that if R1is sufﬁciently greater than R2,Vmtends
toV2, and that for R2sufﬁciently greater than R1,Vm
tends to V1.
(c) In what way does this problem resemble two voltage
dividers?
We next continue with purely resistive circuits to demon-
strate the laws of charge conservation and the principle ofsuperposition. Here, the learning objective is that the equiva-lent circuit of a single ion channel branch comprises a ﬁxedresistor and a switch in series with a voltage generator thatrepresents an ionic gradient with all ion channels in themembrane connected in parallel. Students learn that by usinga voltage clamp technique, one can ﬁx any desired voltageacross this circuit and, thus, quasi-instantly charge a mem-brane capacitor that is in parallel with a selected ion channelbranch. The clamping condition here corresponds to ﬁxingV
in–Voutto a desired value. The electrophysiological record-
ing appearing in problem 5 is taken from data acquired bystudents in one of our laboratory sessions.25,26
Problem 5. Figure 3shows an electrophysiological record-
ing of gramicidin channel activity recorded at an appliedvoltage of /C0120 mV under symmetrical ionic conditions
across a lipid bilayer membrane.
Fig. 1. Equivalent RC-circuit of a biological membrane. It consists of mem-
brane capacitance C min parallel with the leak conductance g land ionic con-
ductances (g Na,g K). Reversal potentials (V l,V Na,V K) reﬂect ionic
conditions of electrochemical equilibrium for each conductance branch.
Membrane potential V mis deﬁned as a difference between intracellular and
extracellular electrical potentials (V in–Vout). Since the extracellular node is
grounded, V mequals basically to V in.
 Fig. 2. Circuit diagram of problem 4.
589 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Shlyonsky et al. 589 04 October 2023 23:13:57
(a) Draw an equivalent electrical circuit for this bilayer.
What is the maximal number of channels open at the
same time in this bilayer?
(b) Evaluate a unitary conductance of the channel
observed and the leak resistance of the bilayer. [R l
ﬃ150 GX,cis between 13.3 and 14.2 pS]
(c) Make a series of graphs (one for each channel
observed) that give the time evolution of unitary cur-
rents of each channel that would together correspond to
the total ion channel currents observed. Align the time
axis of your graphs with that of the given ﬁgure.
Now the capacitor becomes an active player in the circuit,
increasing its complexity. The following problem tests
knowledge of the corresponding electrostatics, namely, the
charge accumulated by a capacitor at a given voltage.
Students already know that maintaining the cell membrane
at a ﬁxed potential induces a stationary state where Ohm’s
law describes the behavior of the voltage. Students should be
able to make unit conversions and to deal with proportions;
that is, we link geometry and physics.
Problem 6. Consider a spherical and electrically passive
cell of membrane resistance 1.5 G Xand speciﬁc membrane
capacitance 1 lF/cm2. The resting membrane voltage is
/C071 mV.
(a) What current should be injected to maintain the cell at
the potential of /C065 mV? [I inj¼4 pA]
(b) Under voltage-clamp conditions, we need to add an
electrical charge of 30 /C210/C015C to one side of the
membrane to bring the potential to /C080 mV. Calculate
the radius of this cell. [ r¼5:15lm/C138
The next problem illustrates summation of steady-state
synaptic currents at the space point corresponding to the
soma of the neuron. In this problem, we introduce for the
ﬁrst time the notion of a threshold potential beyond which
the cell behavior is no longer passive.Problem 7. Consider a simpliﬁed neuron as shown in
Fig. 4. The resting membrane resistance and capacitance of
the soma are 1.2 G Xand 30 pF, respectively. The cell is at a
resting membrane voltage of /C065 mV, and the threshold for
the appearance of action potentials in the soma is 10 mV
above the resting potential. The dendritic membrane is elec-
trically passive and has a space constant k¼1 mm. Two
stimulation electrodes are placed on two different dendrites
at the same distance dfrom the soma.
(a) If the current injected at each electrode locally depolar-
izes the membrane to /C055 mV, at what maximum dis-
tance dcan these electrodes be placed so that the
membrane potential in the soma reaches the threshold
of excitability during simultaneous injection of current
by the two electrodes? ½d¼0:693 mm]
(b) In the absence of dendritic stimulation, calculate the
duration of a 20 pA current pulse injected directly into
the soma that brings the membrane potential to the
threshold. [t ¼19:4m s/C138
Additional tutorial questions on biological applications of
electrostatics and on RC circuits in stationary states can be
found in Ref. 3(Chapter 12: problems 7, 8), Ref. 4(Chapter
15: problems 21, 22 and Chapter 16: problems 22, 23), Ref.5(Chapter 17: problems 3, 5), Ref. 7(Sec. 6: problems 27,
28, 32, 34–36, 52, 62, 66), and Ref. 8(Chapter 12: problems
11, 13, 15, 16, 19).
C. Cellular RC circuits in non-stationary states
The following problem is based on Kirchhoff’s current
law and the superposition principle; that is, the resistive and
the capacitive currents must be calculated separately and
summed. Students should also recall that the sum of mem-brane currents is always zero in a resting cell.
Problem 8. Consider a spherical electrically passive cell
whose membrane resistance and capacitance are 200 M X
and 200 pF, respectively. The resting membrane voltage is/C070 mV. This cell is voltage-clamped using a voltage proto-
col sketched in Fig. 5. Draw a graph giving the evolution of
the total membrane current during this experiment.
The learning objective of the following exercise is to
show that the membrane potential of a cell that is permeableto only one type of ion does not depend on the membrane
conductance. In other words, students study how a close-to-
the-Nernst-type membrane approaches its steady state whenthe steady state depends only on the value of the Nernst
potential in given conditions. This problem also demon-
strates that the cell membrane behaves as a passive low-passﬁlter. This type of ﬁlter will have been seen during lectures.
Problem 9.
Consider a spherical cell of a radius of 12 lm
whose speciﬁc membrane capacitance is 1 lF/cm2. The
plasma membrane of this cell is permeable only to potassiumions, and these channels are not open all the time. This
results in a speciﬁc conductance of 0.3 mS/cm
2. The intracel-
lular and the extracellular concentrations of Kþare 110
and 5 mM, respectively. The cell is at 37/C14C. At t ¼0, we
instantly change the extracellular concentration of Kþto
50 mM.
(a) Qualitatively describe the evolution of the membrane
potential starting at t ¼0.
Fig. 3. Gramicidin channels recording in a lipid bilayer membrane at
/C0120 mV applied voltage and under symmetrical ionic conditions.
Fig. 4. Schematical neuron. Stimulation electrodes are placed either on two
dendrites at a distance dfrom soma or directly on soma.
590 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Shlyonsky et al. 590 04 October 2023 23:13:57
(b) Develop an equation that describes the evolution of
the membrane potential starting at t ¼0. [V¼Vini
þðVfin/C0ViniÞ/C1ð1/C0e/C0300tÞ/C138
(c) We now perform the same experiment in the presence
of an agonist of potassium channels. This increases thetime spent by the channels in the conductive state with-out any effect on single-channel conductances. Howwill the evolution of the membrane potential be modi-
ﬁed compared to the situation in the absence of this
agonist? [faster]
(d) What is the dependence of the membrane potential of
this particular cell on the membrane conductance?[none]
(e) Based on your answers to the previous questions, can
you explain in what way the cell membrane behaveslike a low-pass ﬁlter?
(f) Based on your calculations in (b), what do you think
about the feasibility of such manipulation with extra-cellular medium exchange? [not feasible]
Comment to the instructor: Students should be able to
solve the differential equation that starts with writingKirchhoff’s law of charge conservation for the intracellularnode that is common between the capacitor and the resistor.The solution of this differential equation resembles anexpression of the voltage relaxation in an RC-circuit.
As students advance, they learn about temporal and spatial
signal summation, which will be used routinely in a laterneurophysiology course. For the moment, these phenomenaare studied using simple RC circuits. Knowledge of thesuperposition principle is required to solve the followingproblem. Students separately treat different electrical phe-
nomena, the charge and discharge of capacitor on top of a
resting membrane voltage, and sum their contributions. The
problem demonstrates a practical approach in neural cell
stimulation by current pulse trains, in which a threshold
potential value is attained by using pulse trains having short
delays, in contrast to stimulation using a long single pulse.
Problem 10. Consider a spherical cell of radius of 11 lm.
The speciﬁc membrane capacitance is 1 lF/cm
2. The mem-
brane of this cell contains only ion channels perfectly selec-
tive for Kþions with a unitary conductance of 3 pS and a
density of 0.5 channel per lm2. These channels are perma-
nently open. The cell resting membrane potential is /C067 mV.
(a) At t ¼0, we inject a ﬁrst current pulse of constant
amplitude 40 pA for 8 ms; see Fig. 6. What is the value
of membrane potential observed at the end of this
pulse? [ /C054.75 mV]
(b) After a time interval Dt during which no current is
injected, a second current pulse of the same amplitude and
duration is injected. What is the value of the membrane
potential at the end of the second pulse if Dt¼1m sa n d
ifDt¼10 ms? [ /C051.57 and /C053.93 mV, respectively]
(c) Repeat the calculations for pulses of 40 ms duration.
How do the results differ from the previous cases?
[DVm¼DVmaxin both cases]
Comment to the instructor: In this problem, we observe
(1) the charging of the capacitor during the ﬁrst pulse, (2)
discharging of the capacitor during the time interval Dt and
the time of the second pulse, and (3) the charging of the
capacitor during the second pulse. All of these occur inde-
pendently and on the top of the resting (i.e., stationary) mem-
brane voltage generation. The time constant scalculation
requires accurate conversion of units and reasoning with pro-
portions. When the value of sis calculated, it becomes clear
that there is no temporal summation when the pulses have a
duration of 40 ms because t >5s(recall that e/C05<0.01).
Several problems on RC-circuits in non-stationary states
are presented in Ref. 7(Sec. 6: problems 29 and 37).
D. Ionic currents, ion selectivity, and excitability
The learning objectives of the following two problems are
to understand the important cellular biophysical parameters
of the rheobase and chronaxie. The rheobase is the minimal
amplitude of a rectangular current pulse of inﬁnite duration
that brings the membrane potential to the excitability thresh-
old value, while the chronaxie is the minimal duration of a
rectangular current pulse of the doubled rheobase amplitudeafter which the membrane potential reaches the excitability
Fig. 5. Voltage-clamp protocol applied in problem 8 and an aligned graph
for sketching corresponding evolution of the membrane current.
Fig. 6. Current-clamp protocol used in problem 10. Both current pulses areapplied for either 8 or 40 ms. The time delay between two pulses is either
Dt¼1m so r Dt¼10 ms.
591 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Shlyonsky et al. 591 04 October 2023 23:13:57
threshold value. Students need to appreciate that both of
these depend only on the passive electrical properties of thecell: the leak resistance and membrane capacitance. Through
this understanding, students realize that simple physics gov-
erns quite complicated physiological cell properties. The the-oretical deﬁnitions of rheobase and chronaxie are required tosolve these problems, because they encode additional impor-tant information. When working these problems, we ask stu-
dents to draw the equivalent circuit. Here, again geometry
links to physics.
Problem 11. Consider a spherical cell of a diameter of
10lm. At membrane potentials below the threshold of action
potential generation (at V
m</C054 mV ¼Vth), this cell has
Ohmic behavior, and its resistance R ¼1.5 GXis determined
by the permanent opening of 10 000 potassium-selectivechannels. The speciﬁc membrane capacitance is 1 lF/cm2.
The intracellular and the extracellular concentrations of Kþ
are 110 and 5 mM, respectively. The cell is at 37/C14C.
(a) What current should be injected to voltage-clamp this
cell at /C080 mV? In which direction do potassium ions
move under these conditions? [I K¼1.73 pA]
(b) This cell is placed under osmotic conditions that line-
arly reduce its plasma membrane surface area by 50%in one hour; the cell remains spherical at all times. Theionic concentrations inside and outside the cell alsoremain the same. There is no exo- and endocytosis dur-
ing this period; that is, the number of channels and
their activities do not change. Draw a graph of the evo-lution of the rheobase and a graph of the evolution ofthe chronaxie during this hour. Include proper scaleson your graphs. [I
rh¼19.1 pA ¼const; schdecreases
linearly from 3.26 to 1.63 ms]
Problem 12. Consider a spherical neuron whose mem-
brane has a speciﬁc capacitance of 1 lF/cm2. Its plasma
membrane contains voltage-dependent potassium andsodium channels; the leak conductance is g
L¼0.0125 mS/
cm2. The ionic conditions are such that the equilibrium
potentials for potassium and sodium ions are /C080 and
70 mV, respectively. The reversal potential of the leak con-ductance is /C060 mV.
(a) Calculate speciﬁc sodium and potassium conductances
(g
Naand g K) as well as their ratio in a resting cell at
/C067.2 mV if the total membrane resistance under these
conditions is R tot¼3200Xcm2.[gNa¼0.025 mS/cm2,
gK¼0.275 mS/cm2,gK/gNa¼11]
(b) Calculate speciﬁc sodium and potassium conductances
(gNaand g K) as well as their ratio at the peak of the
action potential of 41.7 mV, if the total membraneresistance under these conditions is R
tot¼50X/C1cm2.
[gNa¼16.225 mS/cm2,gK¼3.7625 mS/cm2,gK/gNa
¼0.232]
(c) The permanent injection of /C050 pA into the resting
cell hyperpolarizes the plasma membrane by 12.74mV. Calculate the radius of the neuron. [r ¼10lm]
(d) Calculate the chronaxie of this neuron. [ s
ch
¼2.218 ms]
(e) What is the value of capacitive current in questions a,
b, and c? Explain. [I c¼0]
Physiologists can acquire much useful information about
living cells from electrophysiological techniques like patch-clamp and lipid bilayer membrane measurements.Interpreting this information requires knowledge of several
(bio)physical concepts, such as reversal potential and open
probability of an ion channel, electrochemical driving force,
the Nernst potential, and the Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz poten-
tial, all of which are discussed in the course. The term “ion
selectivity” is also introduced.
Problem 13. Consider a spherical neuron with a radius of
15lm; the plasma membrane has a speciﬁc capacitance of
1lF/cm2. This membrane contains 10 000 ion channels with
a unitary conductance of 2 pS. These channels are permeable
to both Kþand Naþwith the selectivity ratio g K/gNa¼4.
The ionic concentrations are [Naþ]ext¼140 mM, [Naþ]int
¼11 mM, [Kþ]ext¼5 mM, and [Kþ]int¼110 mM. This
experiment is performed at a temperature of 15/C14C.
(a) The application of an agonist increases the open proba-
bility of these channels from 0.4 to 0.8, without chang-ing the selectivity ratio. Construct two I/V graphs
showing the total membrane current as a function of
the applied potential in the range between /C0100 and
þ100 mV in both the absence and presence of the ago-
nist. Specify units on the axes. [I ¼20/C1P
O/C1(Vþ48.7),
where I is in pA and V is in mV]
(b) Calculate the resting membrane potential of the cell
in both the absence and presence of the agonist. [V rev
¼/C048.7 mV]
(c) How does the open probability of the channels modu-
late the resting membrane potential of this cell?
Problem 14. A cell with negligible background membrane
conductance expresses 2000 identical copies of ion channelsin its plasma membrane. All we know is that these channels
have an unitary conductance of 15 pS, they are constantly
open, and are highly selective for one ionic species. During a
voltage-clamp experiment performed at an applied potential
ofþ30 mV, a total membrane current of 3.49 nA is mea-
sured. The ionic concentrations are [Naþ]ext¼140 mM,
[Naþ]int¼10 mM, [Kþ]ext¼7m M , [ Kþ]int¼100 mM,
[Cl/C0]ext¼120 mM, and [Cl/C0]int¼4 mM. The temperature is
22/C14C.
(a) Determine for which ionic species these channels are
selective. [Chloride]
(b) Which hypotheses did you have to make?
More ideas for this type of problems can be found in Ref.
7(Sec. 9: problems 19, 20–26).
E. Hodgkin–Huxley model
One of the ultimate goals of our course is to familiarize
students with the Hodgkin–Huxley computational model of
cell excitability. Readers can ﬁnd a complete description ofthis model in Sec. 6.13 in Ref. 7. Exam questions on this
model integrate practically all of the theory seen by students
up to this point. For example, one of the learning objectives
of the following problem is to show that the assumption of
reaching 99% of the value of a parameter that follows expo-nential growth after exactly ﬁve time constants is not analyti-
cally correct. This problem describes an actual experiment
performed by Hodgkin and Huxley when they were develop-
ing their model and needed to ﬁnd the way to distinguish
potassium and sodium ion currents.
Problem 15 . We realize a voltage-clamp experiment using
a squid giant axon at 8
/C14C in which the membrane potential
is ﬁrst clamped at /C065 mV and then stepped to /C020 mV.
592 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Shlyonsky et al. 592 04 October 2023 23:13:57
(a) Given that the ionic concentrations are [Naþ]int
¼50 mM, [Kþ]ext¼20 mM, and [Kþ]int¼400 mM
calculate the extracellular concentration of Naþfor
which the contribution of sodium channels to the mem-brane currents during this voltage step will be zero.[21.9 mM]
(b) In the Hodgkin–Huxley model of excitability, the
kinetic functions a
n(V) and bn(V) that determine the
opening of the voltage-dependent potassium channel
are given by
an¼/C00:01 ms/C01mV/C0155 mV þV ðÞ
e/C00:1m V/C0155 mV þV ðÞ/C01; (7)
bn¼0:125 ms/C01e/C00:0125 mV/C0165mV þV ðÞ: (8)
Calculate the fraction of potassium channels open in
the stationary state at /C020 mV. [Po ¼0.486]
(c) What time will be needed to reach 99% of the station-
arynvalue ( n1)? [t¼10.68 ms]
Other excellent tutorial questions about the Hodgkin–Huxley
model are presented in Sec. 6 (problems 40–43, 48–50, 54)in Ref. 7.
III. CONCLUSIONS
The exam problems presented here require an understand-
ing of physical concepts and the application of both mathe-matics and physical laws. Their solutions are based onrigorous knowledge of the vocabulary of the physiology ofliving cells and knowledge of their excitable behavior; stu-dents need to be able to interpret special terminology inproblem texts to extract pertinent data. We hope that themodels described in these problems are of value to the stu-dents in that they will provide a foundation for them todevelop their own insights. They may also be of value toteachers of biophysics as sources of new ideas for studentinstruction and assessment.
a)ORCID: 0000-0003-2999-6553.
1B. S. Bloom, M. D. Engelhart, E. J. Furst, W. H. Hill, and D. R.
Krathwohl, “Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classiﬁcation of
educational goals,” in Handbook I: Cognitive Domain (David McKay
Company, New York, 1956).
2G. B. Benedek and F. M. H. Villars, Physics With Illustrative Examples
from Medicine and Biology. Vol. 3. Electricity and Magnetism (Springer,
New York, 2000).
3P. Nelson, M. Radosavljevic, and S. Bromberg, Biological Physics (W.H.
Freeman & Co. Ltd., New York, 2007).4J. Newman, Physics of the Life Sciences (Springer-Verlag, New York,
2008).
5R. Phillips, J. Kondev, J. Theriot, and H. G. Garcia, Physical Biology of
the Cell , 2nd ed. (Garland Science, London, New York, 2013).
6B. J. Roth and R. K. Hobbie, “A collection of homework problems about
the application of electricity and magnetism to medicine and biology,”Am. J. Phys. 82, 422–427 (2014).
7R. K. Hobbie and B. J. Roth, Intermediate Physics for Medicine and
Biology , 5th ed. (Springer-Verlag, New York, 2015).
8I. P. Herman, Physics of the Human Body, Biological and Medical
Physics, Biomedical Engineering (Springer International Publishing, New
York, 2016).
9W. C. Parke, Biophysics: A Student’s Guide to the Physics of the Life
Sciences and Medicine (Springer International Publishing, New York,
2020).
10J. B. Marion, General Physics With Bioscience Essays , 2nd ed. (John
Wiley and Sons, New York, 1985).
11J. Kane and M. Sternheim, General Physics (John Wiley and Sons, New
York, 1991).
12P. Davidovits, Physics in Biology and Medicine , 3rd ed. (Academic,
London, 2008).
13P. Nelson, Biological Physics: Energy, Information, Life , 1st ed. (W. H.
Freeman and Company, New York, 2008).
14S. A. Kane, Introduction to Physics in Modern Medicine , 2nd ed. (CRC,
Boca Raton, 2009).
15K. Franklin, P. Muir, T. Scott, L. Wilcocks, and P. Yates, Introduction to
Biological Physics for the Health and Life Sciences (John Wiley and Sons,
New York, 2010).
16K. A. Dill and S. Bromberg, Molecular Driving Forces: Statistical
Thermodynamics in Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Nanoscience , 2nd
ed. (Garland Science, London, New York, 2011).
17I. D. Campbell, Biophysical Techniques (Oxford U. P., Oxford, 2012).
18A. W. Wood, Physiology, Biophysics, and Biomedical Engineering , Series
in Medical Physics and Biomedical Engineering (CRC, Boca Raton,2012).
19P. R. Kesten and D. L. Tauck, University Physics for the Physical and Life
Sciences: Volume II , 1st ed. (W. H. Freeman, New York, 2012).
20T. A. Waigh, The Physics of Living Processes: A Mesoscopic Approach
(John Wiley and Sons, New York, 2014).
21R. D. Knight, B. Jones, and S. Field, College Physics: A Strategic
Approach , 3rd ed. (Pearson Education Limited, San Francisco, 2015).
22F. Cleri, The Physics of Living Systems (Springer International Publishing,
Switzerland, 2016).
23J. S. Walker, Physics , 5th ed. (Pearson Addison-Wesley, San Francisco,
2017).
24B. Hille, Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes , 3rd ed. (Sinauer
Associates, Sunderland, 2001).
25V. Shlyonsky, F. Dupuis, and D. Gall, “The OpenPicoAmp: An open-source planar lipid bilayer ampliﬁer for hands-on learning of neuro-science,” PLoS One 9, e108097 (2014).
26V. Shlyonsky and D. Gall, “The OpenPicoAmp-100k: An open-source
high-performance ampliﬁer for single channel recording in planar lipidbilayers,” Pﬂugers Arch. 471, 1467–1480 (2019).
27See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0075228 for solutions of the problems.
593 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Shlyonsky et al. 593 04 October 2023 23:13:57
