
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| JANUARY 01 2023
Experimental realization of an additively manufactured
monatomic lattice for studying wave propagation 
Nehemiah Mork ; Sai A. R. Kuchibhatla  
 ; Michael J. Leamy  
 ; Matthew D. Fronk
Am. J. Phys.  91, 56–63 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0085124
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Glass T ransition in a Spherical Monatomic Liquid
AIP Conference Proceedings  (February 2008)
Characteristics of a barrier discharge in monatomic and molecular gases
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (May 1999)
A facile strategy to produce monatomic tantalum metallic glass
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (September 2020) 04 October 2023 22:48:52
Experimental realization of an additively manufactured monatomic
lattice for studying wave propagation
Nehemiah Mork,a)Sai A. R. Kuchibhatla,b)and Michael J. Leamyc)
George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
771 Ferst Dr NW, Atlanta, Georgia 30313
Matthew D. Fronk
Physics Department, U.S. Naval Academy, 572C Holloway Road, Annapolis, Maryland 21402
(Received 12 January 2022; accepted 26 September 2022)
Increasing interest in wave propagation in phononic systems and metamaterials motivates the
development of experimental designs, measurement techniques, and fabrication methods for use in
basic research and classroom demonstrations. The simplest phononic system, the monatomic chain,
exhibits rich physics such as dispersion and frequency-domain ﬁltering. However, a limitednumber of experimental studies showcase monatomic chains for macroscale observation of
phonons. Herein, we discuss the design, fabrication, and testing of monatomic lattices as enabled
by three-dimensional (3D) printing. Using this widely available technology, we provide designguidelines for realization of a monatomic chain composed of 3D printed serpentine springs and
press-ﬁtted cylindrical masses. We also present measurement techniques that record propagating
waves and algorithms for the experimental determination of dispersion behavior.
#2023 Published
under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0085124
I. INTRODUCTION
Wave propagation in phononic lattices and metamaterials
exhibits rich physics of interest to the education and research
communities. Recent studies have documented the perfor-
mance of phononic lattices as ﬁlters,1,2lenses,3,4and
diodes.5,6In classroom settings, phononic lattices provide an
accessible case study on dispersion, group velocity, and
phase velocity.7–9Perhaps the simplest phononic lattice, the
monatomic chain, is composed of a single mass and spring
that repeats periodically.10–14However, these manually
assembled designs can be tedious to realize, exhibit vulnera-
bility to impurities in their periodicity, are susceptible toout-of-plane and torsional motions, experience signiﬁcant
dissipation at interfaces and where contact is made with con-
straining structures, and lack the technological sophistication
that excites students in science and engineering. In addition,
traditional designs typically capture standing waves, as
opposed to travelling waves, in ﬁnite lattices.15–17The inher-
ent challenges associated with fabricating and assembling a
large number of unit cells with few defects and low dissipa-
tion create a formidable barrier to experimental observation
of travelling waves in mechanical lattices.
Additive manufacturing is an advanced but increasingly
widespread fabrication method capable of rapidly producingmaterials with a high degree of uniformity. 3D printing is a
common additive manufacturing technique in which parts
are created one layer at a time. Because of its repeatable,
high throughput nature, 3D printing can quickly fabricate
easy-to-assemble periodic structures with high geometric
complexity and low disorder. While prior studies have suc-
cessfully implemented 3D printing to produce lattice materi-
als, they considered structures with continuous, multi-modal
elastic members.18–20Embedded masses vibrate “locally”
relative to the host medium instead of directly coupling to
their nearest neighbor via a massless spring-like connection.Consequently, higher-order structural dynamics of the elastic
members between masses can be excited, which would beundesirable for a discrete lattice experiment showcasing one-
dimensional phonon propagation.
In this paper, we discuss the design, fabrication, and test-
ing of precision monatomic lattices as enabled by additive
manufacturing. In doing so, we detail an experiment demon-strating travelling wave packets in a monatomic lattice suit-
able for an undergraduate physics course using equipment
that is becoming increasingly widespread, user-friendly, andaffordable. Although we focus on a monatomic lattice for
our demonstration, we discuss generic experimental design
guidelines, which can be applied to more complicated sys-tems such as diatomic chains and Su–Schrieffer–Heeger lat-tices. We seek to inform and empower future experiments
with tunable, rapidly fabricated, precision lattices that sup-
port macroscopic phonon propagation.
We organize this paper as follows: First, we review pho-
nonic behavior in inﬁnite and ﬁnite monatomic lattices.
Next, we discuss the experimental design and parameter
choices. We then present the design of 3D printed serpentinesprings with integrated mass casings for tuning the stiffness
of a macro-scale monatomic lattice. We borrow the serpen-
tine spring design from the micro-electromechanical systems(MEMS)
21–23community and use the design to overcome
many issues with traditional methods noted earlier. Finally,
we present results obtained from the fabricated setup thatcaptures wave propagation and dispersion on the macroscale,
before concluding with ﬁnal remarks.
II. THEORY OF WAVE PROPAGATION
IN A MONATOMIC LATTICE
A monatomic lattice consists of a unit cell, composed of a
single mass, coupled to its neighbors by force laws that can
be implemented as springs. This system is often used as amodel for phonons. For further details on the theory of
phonons, the reader is referred to monographs on solid state
physics.
7–9
56 Am. J. Phys. 91(1), January 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 56 04 October 2023 22:48:52
Consider an inﬁnite monatomic lattice as depicted in Fig. 1.
The direct lattice spacing, a, is the distance between two equiva-
lent positions in neighbouring unit cells with mass m,a n dt h e
spring constant coupling them is represented by k. Consequently,
the equation of motion governing the nthunit cell is
m€unþk2un/C0un/C01/C0unþ1 ðÞ ¼0; (1)
where undenotes the displacement of the nthmass. Equation
(1)admits a plane-wave solution as
un¼Aeiðxt/C0jnaÞ; (2)
where Adenotes the amplitude of displacement, x¼2pf
denotes the angular frequency where fis the temporal fre-
quency, and jdenotes the wavenumber. The displacements
are given by the real or imaginary parts of un. It is customary
to re-express the wavenumber in terms of a dimensionlesspropagation constant
l¼ja; (3)
where the propagation constant lis a (generally) complex
quantity whose real and imaginary parts denote the phaseand attenuation constants, respectively. In the absence ofattenuation, lis purely real. Substituting Eq. (2)into Eq. (1)
leads to the dispersion relationship
x¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2k
mð1/C0coslÞr
: (4)
By rearranging Eq. (4), the propagation constant is expressed
in terms of the angular frequency as
l¼arccos 1 /C0mx2
2k/C18/C19
: (5)
The wavelength kin the discrete lattice represents the num-
ber of unit cells (or equivalently the number of masses) inone spatial period of the wave. This quantity relates to thepropagation constant as
k¼
2p
l: (6)
For a monatomic lattice, the smallest wavelength spans two
unit cells and corresponds to a propagation constant l¼p.
For each jlj>p, there exists a l2ð /C0p;pÞsuch that the lat-
tice state (displacement and velocities of the masses) is thesame. Hence, all waves are uniquely determined by wavenum-bers in the region l2ð /C0p;pÞ.F i g u r e 2displays the band
structure (consisting of a single dispersion curve) governingwave propagation in a monatomic lattice with mass m¼0.1 kg
and stiffness k¼6000 N/m. The physical values used to gener-
ate Fig. 2correspond to the mass and stiffness used in the
experimental apparatus described later. Note that the x-axis of
Fig.2uses the normalized propagation constant, l=p.The monatomic lattice features a cut-off frequency above
which wave propagation is prohibited, determined by evalu-ating the dispersion relationship at l¼p,
f
c¼1
pﬃﬃﬃﬃ
k
mr
: (7)
Above this frequency, the propagation constant is an imagi-
nary quantity, which results in evanescent waveforms, orexponential decay of a wave packet’s amplitude through thelattice. The dispersion relationship can also be used to calcu-late phase and group velocities
c
p¼x
l¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2k
mð1/C0coslÞ
l2s
; (8)
cg¼dx
dl¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
k
mcosl
2r
: (9)
Monatomic lattices are dispersive media: Both phase and
group velocity depend on frequency (or, equivalently, thepropagation constant). Figure 3depicts the phase and group
velocity as functions of the propagation constant. Note that
Fig. 1. Schematic of a monatomic lattice. The unit cell is identiﬁed by the
dashed box.
Fig. 2. Band structure of a monatomic lattice with m¼0.1 kg and k¼6000
N/m. Horizontal dashed line indicates the cut-off frequency.
Fig. 3. Phase and group velocity curves for a monatomic lattice withm¼0.1 kg and k¼6000 N/m.
57 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Mork et al. 57 04 October 2023 22:48:52
atl¼pthe group velocity goes to zero, implying standing
waves in which energy does not propagate through the lat-tice. In this mode, adjacent masses have opposite displace-ments and velocities.
A ﬁnite one-dimensional lattice containing Nmasses has
Nmodes of vibration. Under open (or free) boundary condi-
tions, the Nnatural frequencies are found on the dispersion
curves of the inﬁnite lattice’s band structure at equally
spaced propagation constants. A monatomic lattice withm¼0.1 kg and k¼6000 N/m consisting of ten masses pos-
sesses ten natural frequencies as identiﬁed by the verticallines in Fig. 4. A similar procedure yields the natural fre-
quencies for ﬁxed-ﬁxed boundary conditions.
III. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
In the experiment, we are interested in observing travel-
ing wave packets in a monatomic lattice. The design of the
wave propagation experiment consists of identifying thelattice parameters, i.e., the mass and stiffness of the unitcell, the length of the lattice (number of unit cells), and thenumber of cycles of input provided to form the travelingwave packet. The theoretical model of the monatomic lat-tice considers a rigid mass and a massless spring therebymaking the model discrete. However, practically, an experi-ment consists of continuous bodies having both mass andstiffness. In order to minimize the inﬂuence of elastody-
namics of the individual components, it is necessary that
the body used as the mass be extremely stiff compared tothe spring while the spring should have negligible contribu-tion to the mass of the unit cell. The chosen mass and springstiffness determine the cut-off frequency of the lattice. Toexplore the lattice dynamics in the actuator frequency rangeof 0–100 Hz, we chose the masses in the lattice to be 0.1 kgand the spring stiffness to be 6000 N/m. Using Eq. (7),t h i s
combination of lattice parameters results in a cut-off fre-quency of 78 Hz.
Equations (5)and(6)reveal that k!1 asx!0. This
implies a longer lattice is required to study wave propagation
at lower frequencies. The number of cycles of input at thedesired frequency dictates the length of the wave packet trav-elling in the lattice and, thus, directly affects the choice ofnumber of unit cells in the lattice. From the experimental
design point of view, to study wave propagation within a fre-quency range of interest, we choose the number of cycles
and the length of the lattice such that it is possible to separate
the incident and reﬂected wave packets. Considering avail-able lab space, we chose a 4 cycle input signal and a 70 unitcell lattice. In order to observe separate incident and
reﬂected wave packets, the wave packet must, at most, span
twice the number of masses between the mass of observationand the closest end of the lattice. For example, when observ-ing the wave packet pass through the middle of the lattice,
the lowest frequency at which incident and reﬂected wave
packets are separable corresponds to the wavelength ksuch
that 4 k/C2070. This is because the length of the wave pulse is
4kand in order to separate the incident and reﬂected portions
of the wave packet, the wave packet length must, at most,
span twice the distance from the center to the nearest end (70unit cells). Using Eqs. (4)–(6) , this suggests a frequency
lower bound of approximately 14 Hz. Thus, for inputs with
center frequencies above the determined lower limit and
below the cutoff frequency, the incident and reﬂected wavepackets are clearly distinguishable.
IV. 3D PRINTED SERPENTINE SPRING LATTICE
3D printing technology offers rapid prototyping, low pro-
duction times, and batch printing capabilities, which are
appealing traits for the fabrication of lattices composed ofseveral unit cells. Furthermore, this method limits the disor-der in the assembled lattice and produces lightweight springs
capable of encasing heavy masses.
Due to their planar shape and compatibility with additive
manufacturing, we employ serpentine springs to provide lin-ear restoring forces on the masses in the monatomic chain.Serpentine springs derive their name from their slender, cir-
cuitous geometry and are commonly used in micro-
electromechanical systems (MEMS).
21–23These springs
have out-of-plane and torsional rigidity, a feature that tradi-tional coil springs lack. Previous monatomic designs have
been subject to unwanted whirling behavior if not con-
strained,16or suffer from appreciable viscous and/or dry fric-
tion damping due to the addition of roller bearings or guides.The serpentine design lends itself to mass encasement using
vacant receptacles into which heavy masses can be press ﬁt-
ted. Mass encasement minimizes joints and, thus, promotescrystalline uniformity. 3 D-printing many serpentine springssimultaneously as a single body considerably simpliﬁesassembly while eliminating troublesome joints. Figure 5(a)
displays the structure we use to build the lattice for our
experiment. Note the design of mass encasements, or voidspaces for neighboring masses to be coupled by the serpen-tine springs. Relevant dimensions of the serpentine springs
are labeled in the inset. We arrive at the dimensions listed in
Table Iby ﬁrst using an analytical model to approximate the
stiffness to be close to the desired 6000 N/m and then tunethe design using ﬁnite element (FE) software to obtain a
more accurate stiffness value.
The serpentine spring is modelled as a series of guided
cantilever beams,
23and a closed form expression for the
overall spring constant ky, of each spring unit of the structure
displayed in Fig. 5is
k0¼12EI
L3; (10)
Fig. 4. Natural frequencies of a ﬁnite (10 mass) lattice marked on the disper-
sion curve of the inﬁnite lattice ( m¼0.1 kg and k¼6000 N/m). Horizontal
dashed line indicates the cut-off frequency.
58 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Mork et al. 58 04 October 2023 22:48:52
ky¼2/C2k0
nb¼2EtW3
L
nbL3; (11)
where k0denotes the spring constant for a single guided can-
tilever beam of length L, width WL, thickness t, elastic modu-
lusE, and area moment of inertia I¼tW3
L=12. The number
of beams on each side of the spring is denoted by nb(which
is 4 in our design). The factor of two in Eq. (11)results from
two sets of beams in parallel. Inserting the values from TableI, Eq. (11) predicts a spring stiffness of 5615 N/m. Note that
a different set of dimensional values can be used to arrive ata similar estimate. For instance, increasing tandn
bby a fac-
tor 2 would also produce the same estimate. However, thiswould also increase the size of the unit cell. Consequently,selecting appropriate ﬁnal dimensions for the spring is gener-ally an iterative process.
The analytical expression in Eq. (11) readily provides a
ﬁrst approximation of the spring stiffness. A more accurateprediction is obtained through FE analysis using theAbaqus
24software package, where we simulate the deforma-
tion of the designed spring. Figure 5(b) displays the compu-
tational model of the serpentine spring. The bottom surfaceof the serpentine spring is ﬁxed while the top surface is dis-placed by 2 mm. Figure 5(c) depicts the deformation of the
spring unit together with a schematic of beams in series and
parallel to visualize the equivalent stiffness calculation.Simulating small displacements provides a direct proportion-
ality between the reaction force and the applied displacementwith the ratio of the two being the spring’s stiffness. For thedimensions considered, the FE analysis predicts a stiffnessof 6104 N/m, which is within 2% of the desired value of6000 N/m.
An added beneﬁt of using FE software is that it allows for
calculation of the natural frequencies of the serpentine spring.Since it is desired for the springs to operate quasi-statically, itis possible to conﬁrm that the natural frequencies of the springare not being excited during wave propagation. The ﬁrst natu-ral frequency of the spring reported by the FE software is302 Hz, which is signiﬁcantly higher than the lattice’s 78 Hzcutoff frequency. Computer aided design (CAD) ﬁles for theﬁnal design of the serpentine springs can be found on theauthors’ SourceForge website.
25
The serpentine springs are additively manufactured to
build a monatomic lattice for the wave propagation experi-ments. We use a Raise3D Pro2 (Irvine, CA) printer to pro-duce unit cells consisting of springs and mass encasements.The printer size enables printing batches of ﬁve unit cells atonce. To form the entire ﬁnite lattice, a thin layer of Loctitesuper glue joins these batches. We press ﬁt cylindrical stain-less steel masses of 0.1 kg into the encasements positioned
between each spring. In our design, the encasements serve
two purposes. First, they hold the masses in place and con-ﬁne the spring forces to a single plane. Second, they reducethe number of joints in the system, which are often associ-ated with greater defects, dissipation, and nonlinearity. A sil-houette of the masses is printed, and steel masses are pressﬁt into these encasements. For the printing ﬁlament material,we use polylactic acid (PLA) with an approximate densityof 1250 kg/m
3. Using the dimensions of the ﬁnal serpentine
spring design, we calculate the mass of each spring to be0.001 39 kg, which is less than 70 times the mass chosen forthe lattice’s unit cells. Thus, the springs’ mass is negligiblein comparison to the steel masses.
We seek to study the linear wave propagation phenome-
non in the macroscale monatomic chain. Consequently, we
Fig. 5. (a) Schematic of the serpentine spring identifying pertinent dimensions with values given in Table I. (b) Finite element (FE) model and boundary condi-
tions. Displacements of nodes on the bottom surface of the structure are arrested, and compressive load is applied at the nodes on the top surface. (c) T he FE-
predicted spring deformation for a compression of 2 mm. Also shown is the FE mesh along with how the beam stiffnesses ( k0each) combine to form the total
stiffness of the spring. Note that nbis the number of beams in one half of the serpentine spring ( nb¼4 in this ﬁgure).
Table I. Serpentine spring parameters used for analytical stiffness calculations.
Spring parameters
Length ( L) 10.50 mm
Width ( WL) 1.000 mm
Thickness ( t) 5.000 mm
Elastic modulus ( E) 2.600 GPa
End thickness ( WS) 3.000 mm
End height (middle d1) 3.500 mm
End height (top/bottom d2) 3.000 mm
59 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Mork et al. 59 04 October 2023 22:48:52
reference analytical expressions (i.e., Eqs. (10)and(11)) that
assume linear deformation of the serpentine springs. To con-
ﬁrm the linear behavior of our fabricated springs, we com-
press our serpentine structures to known displacements andmeasure the reaction force using a force gauge (Mark-10
model M2–5). Figure 6displays force measurements at vari-
ous displacements for one of our spring samples. Thespring’s restoring force exhibits linear behavior for deforma-
tions under 3 mm. Nonlinearity develops at deformations
above 3 mm, which we attribute to neighbouring beamswithin the spring unit coming into contact. In the linear
region, similar behaviour was observed for tensile loads. We
repeated the test for 7 individual springs isolated from sepa-rate batches giving an average stiffness of 6588 N/m and a
standard deviation of 122 N/m, which is within 10% of the
desired stiffness while the variation among the springs iswithin 4% of the average value.
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Figure 7presents the physical setup while Fig. 8provides an
outline of the data acquisition in the experiment. We make useof widely available and user-friendly vibration testing equip-
ment. We generate a signal corresponding to the desired wave
packet using National Instruments (NI) LabVIEW Signal
Express and output it using an analog voltage output module
(NI DAQ 9263) to an ampliﬁer (B&K Type 2718), which
drives an electrodynamic shaker (B&K Type 4809). A stingertransmits the shaker motion to the ﬁrst mass in the lattice. To
capture the time evolution of the velocity of a selected mass,
we focus a laser Doppler vibrometer (Polytec PDV-100) on a
ﬂag attached to the mass (please refer to the inset of Fig. 7).
The vibrometer evaluates the velocity by measuring the
Doppler shift in the laser beam reﬂected from the measurement
point and outputs a corresponding voltage, which is acquiredby an analog voltage input module (NI DAQ 9234). For addi-
tional details on laser Doppler vibrometry, the interested reader
is referred to a recent review.
26Alternatively, accelerometers
can be mounted on masses to measure their acceleration as a
function of time. However, the accelerometer’s mass should be
signiﬁcantly lower than that of the mass in the chain to avoid
introducing a defect in the lattice’s periodicity. Since all themasses are inline, we include clamps in the design of the mass
encasements as a provision to place a ﬂag above a mass whose
velocity is being measured thereby ensuring there is no obstruc-
tion in the line of sight of the laser. We suspend the 3 D-printed
lattice from a wooden frame and model it as a forced-freechain. These boundary conditions arise from one end of the lat-
tice being connected to the shaker, which inputs the wave
packet, while the other end remains unconstrained. The lattice
is positioned approximately l¼33 cm below the wooden frame
using ﬁshing line. The natural frequency of the masses acting
as pendulums is negligibly small (1 =2pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g=lp
¼0:87 Hz,
where g¼9.81 m/s
2is the acceleration due to gravity), thus cir-
cumventing the rotational nonlinear dynamics of large angle
pendulum oscillation at the frequencies of interest.
Furthermore, suspending the masses exhibits very little loss due
to dry friction or viscous damping as a low cost alternative to
other support mechanisms such as roller bearings or guide rails.
VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We ﬁrst use our experimental setup to calibrate the unit
cell spring stiffness by comparing an experimental frequency
Fig. 6. Experimentally measured force-deformation curve for one sample of
the serpentine spring.
Fig. 7. Experimental setup of the monatomic lattice. The lattice is suspended from a wooden frame using ﬁshing line. An electrodynamic shaker excites the
ﬁnite lattice at one end while two laser Doppler vibrometers measure the velocity at the input mass and another mass in the bulk of the lattice simultane ously.
The green and blue inset ﬁgures show the ﬂag, which reﬂects the laser beam and metallic cylinder masses placed ﬁrmly in the mass encasements, respectiv ely.
60 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Mork et al. 60 04 October 2023 22:48:52
response to the one computed analytically. The frequency
response is a standard characterization method in vibration
testing wherein the system is excited and the ratio of an out-
put physical quantity to input physical quantity is computedor measured. Typically, the input-output quantities areselected among displacement, velocity, acceleration, andforce. We compare the ratio of output velocity to inputvelocity as these quantities are readily obtained by the laserDoppler vibrometer measurements. Once the springs are cal-ibrated, we conduct wave propagation studies by injecting
wave packets at different frequencies into the lattice. We
acquire the velocity data for consecutive masses by perform-ing a series of experiments with the same input signal whilemoving the laser ﬂag for each iteration. The collected veloc-ity data are used to experimentally determine the dispersionbehavior in the macroscale monatomic lattice.
To calibrate the spring stiffness of the unit cell in our fabri-
cated lattice, we compare the resonance peaks of an experi-
mentally measured frequency response to the theoretical
response computed using the matrix equations of motion. Weobtain the frequency response of the ﬁnite lattice by providinga continuous harmonic excitation to the ﬁrst mass of the latticeand collecting velocity data at the ﬁrst (i.e., driven) and ﬁfthmasses. The frequency of input excitation is swept throughvalues associated with the lattice’s theoretical passband. The
experimental and analytical frequency responses of the lattice
are obtained by evaluating the ratio of the velocity amplitudeat the ﬁfth mass to that at the ﬁrst mass for each frequency inthe sweep. For further details of the theoretical computationplease refer to the supplementary material.
27
Figure 9displays the frequency response of the ﬁnite lat-
tice structure obtained experimentally and computed analyti-cally. A small amount of proportional damping is applied tothe analytical frequency response such that the resonant
peaks are in close agreement with the experimental fre-
quency response. Using a root mean square method of errorcalculation, we ﬁnd the stiffness that results in the bestalignment between experimental and analytical frequency
response to be 6055 N/m with an error of 7.4% compared tothe analytical model. Even spacing between the resonant fre-
quencies conﬁrms the lattice’s periodicity as observed in
Fig.4. Furthermore, the narrow width of the resonance peaks
in the experimentally obtained frequency response of Fig. 9
conﬁrms the low damping of the serpentine springs as well
as the string used to support them. The experimentally charac-
terized spring stiffness (6055 N/m) is in close agreement withthe stiffness calculated using the FE method (6104 N/m).
Additionally, the experimentally calibrated stiffness is within
1% of the desired design stiffness (6000 N/m). Hereafter, weuse 6055 N/m as the stiffness of the lattice unit cell as it is cal-ibrated to the experimental setup.
For wave propagation studies, we inject a 4-cycle wave
packet into the lattice and measure the ensuing wave motion.
Figure 10depicts the input to the signal ampliﬁer for a wave-
form with a center frequency of 30 Hz. Using a laser Doppler
vibrometer, we track the motion of a ﬂag placed over a mass
whose velocity is to be recorded. We repeat the experimentwith the same input for measuring velocities of 30 consecu-tive masses starting at the 15th mass from the input. As a ref-
erence signal, during each iteration of the experiment, we
measure the velocity of mass 1 (input mass) connected to theshaker. Figure 11displays the normalized velocity measured
at mass 19 when the lattice is excited with the input signal in
Fig.10. The incident and reﬂected pulses are clearly identi-
ﬁed. The decay in amplitude observed in the reﬂected wavepacket is attributed to the damping present in the lattice.
We measure the velocities as described previously at vari-
ous input frequencies: 20, 30, 50, 70, and 90 Hz. All mea-
sured signals are truncated to begin when the reference pulsereaches maximum amplitude. We then use the signals
acquired from 30 consecutive masses, approximately in the
midspan of the lattice, to compute the dispersion. We convertthe spatiotemporal velocity data of the masses, time-windowed to exclude the reﬂected pulse, to the frequency-
wavenumber domain using a two-dimensional fast Fourier
Transform (2D-FFT)
28,29implemented in MATLAB .30
Measured data at 8000 points in time and 30 points in space
are zero-padded to the nearest power of 2 for an efﬁcient
implementation of the 2D-FFT algorithm (for more details,please refer to the supplementary material27). The Fourier
Fig. 8. Block diagram depicting the experimental data acquisition.
Fig. 9. Comparison between computed and experimentally measured fre-
quency response in terms of the velocity ratio between ﬁfth and input
masses.
61 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Mork et al. 61 04 October 2023 22:48:52
transform converts temporal information to the frequency
domain and spatial information to the wavenumber domain.The 2D-FFT operates on spatio-temporal wave informationand picks out the dominant frequency-wavenumber pairsassociated with the travelling waves in the medium. TheFourier transform preserves the phase information and thusis able to separate forward and backward propagating waves.We measure the spatio-temporal information in our experi-ment at different input frequencies. Figure 12presents the
computed 2D-FFT linearly summed over various input fre-quencies. Alternately, one could input a broadband fre-quency input and obtain similar results. We use
MATLAB ’s
interpolation method to generate the surface plot. The colorscale of the plot indicates the absolute value of the complexamplitude of waves of different propagation constants andfrequencies. The spectrum for each tested frequency is nor-malized with respect to its maximum value. As expected,prominent amplitudes appear only for positive propagationconstants since the time window for signals is truncated toinclude only the incident pulse. Also as expected, no appre-ciable amplitude is observed for 90 Hz, as it is above thecut-off frequency. An overlaid analytical dispersion curvecomputed for mass and stiffness used in the experimentexhibits close agreement with the experimental results. Nearl¼p, where the wave is more dispersive, we notice a
spread of the amplitude as the transform does not pinpoint a
speciﬁc wavenumber at these higher frequencies. The experi-mental data as well as the associated program ﬁles for pro-
ducing the dispersion curves can be downloaded from our
data repository.
25
VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS
In summary, we presented a macroscale monatomic lat-
tice fabricated using additive manufacturing through which
phononic behavior is experimentally observed. Additive
manufacturing, e.g., 3D printing, enables intricate and tun-able spring designs to be realized. We print several unit
cells together to rapidly assemble large lattices and to mini-
mize the amount of bonding or fastening. Although we pre-
sent an example monatomic system composed of serpentine
structures as springs and metallic cylinders as masses, weprovide generic guidelines, which could be extended and
applied to the study of one dimensional lattices with higher
degrees of freedom. We also demonstrate an experimentallyobtained dispersion curve using the 2D Fourier transform
of velocity data of the monatomic lattice. This study ena-
bles researchers and educators to investigate and demon-strate macroscale phonon propagation in lattices composed
of a large number of unit cells using tunable, additively
manufactured designs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the National Science
Foundation for supporting this research under Grant No.1929849 and Sandia National Laboratories under the
Laboratory Directed Research and Development (LDRD)
Program.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)ORCID: 0000-0001-6315-8508.
b)ORCID: 0000-0002-8335-1919.
c)Electronic mail: michael.leamy@me.gatech.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-
9914-640X.
Fig. 10. Signal input to ampliﬁer consisting of a 30 Hz wave packet. The sig-
nal has a rapid ramp-up to maximum amplitude and is promptly cut off after
four cycles.
Fig. 11. Normalized amplitude of the wave velocity measured at the 19thmass from input end.
Fig. 12. Experimentally obtained dispersion data with the analytically pre-
dicted dispersion curve overlaid in orange.
62 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Mork et al. 62 04 October 2023 22:48:52
1Jakob Søndergaard Jensen, “Phononic band gaps and vibrations in one-and
two-dimensional mass-spring structures,” J. Sound Vib. 266(5),
1053–1078 (2003).
2Weijian Jiao and Stefano Gonella, “Doubly nonlinear waveguides with
self-switching functionality selection capabilities,” Phys. Rev. E 99(4),
042206 (2019).
3D. J. Colquitt, I. S. Jones, N. V. Movchan, and A. B. Movchan,“Dispersion and localization of elastic waves in materials with micro-
structure,” Proc. R. Soc. A 467(2134), 2874–2895 (2011).
4Domenico Tallarico, Natalia V. Movchan, Alexander B. Movchan, and
Daniel. J. Colquitt, “Tilted resonators in a triangular elastic lattice:Chirality, bloch waves and negative refraction,” J. Mech. Phys. Solids
103, 236–256 (2017).
5Zhen Wu and Kon-Well Wang, “On the wave propagation analysis and
supratransmission prediction of a metastable modular metastructure for
non-reciprocal energy transmission,” J. Sound Vib. 458, 389–406 (2019).
6Samuel P. Wallen and Michael R. Haberman, “Nonreciprocal wave phe-
nomena in spring-mass chains with effective stiffness modulation inducedby geometric nonlinearity,” Phys. Rev. E 99(1), 013001 (2019).
7Charles Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics (Wiley, New York, 2004).
8Neil W. Ashcroft and David N. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Saunders
College Publishing, Florida, 1976).
9Leon Brillouin, Wave Propagation in Periodic Structures: Electric Filters
and Crystal Lattices (Dover Publications, New York, 2003).
10R. B. Runk, J. L. Stull, and O. L. Anderson, “A laboratory linear analog
for lattice dynamics,” Am. J. Phys. 31(12), 915–921 (1963).
11M^onica Silva Santos, Eduardo Soares Rodrigues, and Paulo Murilo Castro
de Oliveira, “Spring–mass chains: Theoretical and experimental studies,”
Am. J. Phys. 58(10), 923–928 (1990).
12Jon H. Eggert, “One-dimensional lattice dynamics with periodic boundary
conditions: An analog demonstration,” Am. J. Phys. 65(2), 108–116 (1997).
13Dietrich L €uerßen, Nalini Easwar, Ayesha Malhotra, Libby Hutchins, Kim
Schulze, and Brandi Wilcox, “A demonstration of phonons that imple-
ments the linear theory,” Am. J. Phys. 72(2), 197–202 (2004).
14Changlin Liang, Weiping Ke, Minxue Fu, Changjiang Wang, and Xi
Chen, “An undergraduate experiment of wave motion using a coupled-
pendulum chain,” Am. J. Phys. 83(5), 389–394 (2015).
15J/C19er/C19emy Cabaret, Vincent Tournat, and Philippe B /C19equin, “Amplitude-
dependent phononic processes in a diatomic granular chain in the weaklynonlinear regime,” Phys. Rev. E 86(4), 041305 (2012).16Kevin Manktelow, Michael Leamy, and Massimo Ruzzene, “Analysis and
experimental estimation of nonlinear dispersion in a periodic string,”J. Vib. Acoust. 136(3), 031016 (2014).
17Joseph Lydon, Georgios Theocharis, and Chiara Daraio, “Nonlinear reso-
nances and energy transfer in ﬁnite granular chains,” Phys. Rev. E 91(2),
023208 (2015).
18Weijian Jiao and Stefano Gonella, “Intermodal and subwavelength energytrapping in nonlinear metamaterial waveguides,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 10(2),
024006 (2018).
19Ignacio Arretche and Kathryn H. Matlack, “Experimental testing of vibra-tion mitigation in 3D-printed architected metastructures,” J. Appl. Mech.
86(11), 111008 (2019).
20Kathryn H. Matlack, Anton Bauhofer, Sebastian Kr €odel, Antonio Palermo,
and Chiara Daraio, “Composite 3D-printed metastructures for low-frequency and broadband vibration absorption,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 113(30), 8386–8390 (2016).
21Zhiwei Kou et al. , “A novel MEMS S-springs vibrating ring gyroscope
with atmosphere package,” AIP Adv. 7(12), 125301 (2017).
22Gary Keith Fedder, “Simluation of microelectromechanical systems,”
Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, 1994.
23Jia Yu Chen, “Single- and dual-axis lateral capacitive accelerometersbased on CMOS-MEMS technology,” Masters dissertation, DetMatematisk-Naturvitenskapelige Fakultet, University of Oslo, 2010.
24M. Smith, ABAQUS/Standard User’s Manual, Version 6.9 (DassaultSyste`mes Simulia Corp., 2009).
25CAD ﬁles, “Raw data from experiments and data processing codes,”
<https://sourceforge.net/projects/wave-propagation-lattice/ >.
26S. J. Rothberg et al. , “An international review of laser doppler vibrometry:
Making light work of vibration measurement,” Opt. Laser. Eng. 99, 11–22
(2017).
27See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/10.1119/
5.0085124 .
28Joseph W. Goodman, Introduction to Fourier Optics (Roberts and
Company Publishers, Colorado, 2005).
29D. Alleyne and P. Cawley, “A two-dimensional Fourier transform methodfor the measurement of propagating multimode signals,” J. Acoust. Soc.
Am.89, 1159–1168 (1991).
30MATLAB , version 9.8.0.1721703 (R2020a) Update 7 (The MathWorks, Inc.,
2020).
63 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Mork et al. 63 04 October 2023 22:48:52
