
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2023
Footprinting in a course on energya) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Seth A. Major
Am. J. Phys.  91, 714–720 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0136958
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Standing footprint diagnostic method
J. Appl. Phys.  (October 2013)
Malaysian water footprint accounts: Blue and green water footprint of rice cultivation and the impact of
water consumption in Malaysia
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2016)
Carbon footprint of helium recovery systems
Low T emp. Phys.  (August 2023) 04 October 2023 22:56:50
Footprinting in a course on energya)
Seth A. Majorb)
Department of Physics, Hamilton College, Clinton, New York 13323
(Received 29 November 2022; accepted 18 July 2023)
Footprints provide a way to estimate the relative impact of processes and products on the global
climate. Including footprint analysis in a course on energy simultaneously provides students with
an understanding of this tool and a quantitative guide to approaches that address climate change.College-level classroom activities for (primarily) process-based life cycle carbon footprinting are
discussed.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0136958
I. INTRODUCTION
Whether enrolled in an upper-level statistical mechanics
or an introductory course on energy, students are keen to
learn ways we can address climate change. Footprinting is aquantitative method that can guide reductions of anthropo-
genic greenhouse gas emissions. In this article, I share a
“nugget,” as described in the prompt for the special collec-tions on the physics of the environment, sustainability, and
climate change: A brief description of classroom activities
on footprinting to which the students responded favorably.
In Sec. II, I sketch the course settings in which I have imple-
mented footprinting activities, including discussion of the nec-
essary background required for the activities. In Sec. III,I
brieﬂy introduce carbon and ecological footprints. The class-room footprinting activities are described in Sec. IV.W h i l e
the discussion focuses on footprinting in a course on energy,
these activities may be included in courses statistical physicscourses as well. I conclude with some discussion and student
feedback to the activities in Sec. V.
II. TEACHING CONTEXTS
Elements of footprinting can be most easily incorporated
into college physics courses on energy, although I will alsonote how they can be incorporated into traditional upper-
level statistical physics courses. The classroom activities
described in Sec. IIIwere originally developed for
“Humanity’s Global Impact and the Adirondacks” (Coleg-
370). This course was part of the Hamilton Adirondack
Program in 2016 and included an approximately two-weekdevelopment of footprint analysis. See Appendix A for more
on the program and course. Sample example questions are
given in Appendix B .
The goals of Coleg-370 are:
(1) To understand a detailed “back of the envelope” calculation
of global warming due to CO
2emissions from fossil fuels;
(2) To discover insight of the system-wide thinking of
thermodynamics;
(3) To become more number savvy;(4) To be able to determine how much reduction of CO
2
emissions might be possible via speciﬁc actions or
policies;
(5) To practice using those tools by applying them to local
contexts.
We use footprinting to understand the ﬂow of carbon
in producing items or running activities. Students deter-
mined what factors might be important, where gaps in ourunderstanding lay, and how these footprints could be used to
help direct changes to address climate change.
The course covers necessary background for the footprint-
ing activities, including (i) the physics of energy, taught
through a fairly traditional approach, (ii) quantitative skills
in building spreadsheets and in incorporating uncertaintiestaught through laboratory exercises, and (iii) a calculation ofcarbon production in burning fossil fuels and estimation of
global warming due to this additional atmospheric CO
2.
These estimations were similar to those in Tom Murphy’s“Do the Math” blog.2Before concluding the semester with
the footprinting project, we brieﬂy discussed energy systems,using resources such as Refs. 3and4. More details on the
course are given in Appendix A . Sample example questions
are given in Appendix B . In the upper-level statistical
mechanics course, students have already learned much of thenecessary background. Topic (iii) is taught as an applicationof blackbody radiation.
To support the carbon accounting, it is helpful to ﬁnd the
carbon intensity of combustion and motivate the unit CO
2e.
In the calculation of carbon produced in burning fossil fuels,one ﬁnds that the carbon intensity of fossil fuels is about 3gCO
2/g (grams of CO 2emitted per gram of combusted fuel)
across all fossil fuels. In the course, we investigate the rela-
tive radiative forcing of greenhouse gases by comparing
absorption around 10 lm, which is the peak wavelength of a
blackbody spectrum at about T¼288 K. This gives a metric
of the relative radiative forcing among greenhouse gases.Because the radiative forcing and the lifetimes of these gases
in the atmosphere vary signiﬁcantly, it is helpful to normal-
ize the impacts. We, thus, come to the standard carbon foot-print unit of grams of CO
2equivalent or CO 2e: The amount
of CO 2that would have the equivalent global climate impact
over a hundred year period.5
III. FOOTPRINTS
Humanity’s impact on the world is both broad and ﬁne-
grained.
For example, humans have signiﬁcant effects on biodiver-
sity, fresh water, soils, and climate, only some of which maybe directly addressed by changes guided by footprinting.
When addressing climate change, it is natural to study the
carbon footprints of products and processes to identify driv-ers in greenhouse gas emission. Other accounting methods,such as the ecological footprint, seek to widen the focus toinclude the water and land areas needed to support activities.
Other methods of analysis and modeling are necessary to
guide choices in addressing other areas of our impact such asbiodiversity loss. This section provides an introduction to
714 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 714 04 October 2023 22:56:50
carbon and ecological footprints, both of which were dis-
cussed in class. However, since carbon footprinting is themost common type of footprinting, the availability of exist-ing data makes it the easiest to perform in a classroom set-ting, so Sec. IVwill describe classroom activities based
primarily on the carbon footprint metric.
Carbon footprints are usually based on a process-based
life cycle assessment, an input-output analysis, or, a combi-nation of both (see the chapter “Where do the numbers comefrom?” in Ref. 6). The process-based assessment accounts
for the carbon and other greenhouse gases released in pro-ducing, using, and disposing of a product or completing anactivity. It is a bottom-up approach, building the total foot-print from footprints of sub-processes. An advantage of thisapproach is that it is speciﬁc to the item. The carbon foot-prints of sub-processes are modeled so the origin of the car-
bon in the model is clear. However, process-based
assessment is subject to truncation error when sub-processesare inadvertently left out. For example, a process-based car-bon footprint of a smartphone could include emissions frommanufacturing and transporting but might omit emissionsdue to mining the required raw materials.
The top-down approach of the input-output model starts
with the whole economy and its carbon output.
7As such, the
input-output approach isn’t subject to the truncation “leaks”in the process-based approach. However, input–output analy-sis does not have the speciﬁcity of process-based assessment.In part because the input-output is based on linear algebraand requires large data sets, I have not used this method inclasses other than to refer its results during discussions ofmore complex processes such as the carbon footprint ofiPhone production. As I describe in Sec. IV, there are enough
subtleties in process based assessment that, in an introduc-tory setting, it make sense to focus student work on theprocess-based approach.
One engaging source on carbon footprinting is Berners-
Lee’s The Carbon Footprint of Everything .
6Now in its sec-
ond edition—it was previously titled How Bad are
Bananas? —it makes for surprisingly fun reading. The notes
in the back of the book are a goldmine for those wishing tolook into footprinting methods and literature. One of the stu-dents in Coleg-370 wrote, “The best way [to] overcome [the]barrier to action would be to have everyone read Berners-Lee.”
The ecological footprint, developed by Wackernagel and
Rees,
8recasts the environmental impacts of our activities
(and populations) in terms of area of land and ocean requiredto generate the resources and to absorb the waste they gener-ate. The ecological footprint unit is the number of Earths
necessary to sustainably maintain a way of life. This may be
stated as “If everyone on earth adopted the same lifestyle asthose living in country Xthen this would require Yearths.”
(Typically, Y>1.) Students noted the appeal of this choice
of expressing the result, “… for me, footprints expressed inearths are the most meaningful, because it is a unit we canall visualize,” as one student noted.
The ecological footprint is extensively developed by the
Global Footprint Network (GFN).
9Useful sources include
the online calculator10and curricular materials available
through EUSTEP (Enhancing Universities’ SustainabilityTeaching and Practice through Ecological Footprint), a part-nership between GFN and four universities.
11
Although the ecological footprint has an intuitive unit, the
computation of the ecological footprint is often country-basedand, particularly with online calculators, can seem like a black
box. For instance, I assign students to use this calculator fortheir own footprints in two different countries. They often ﬁnd
that with the same inputs, the resulting ecological footprints are
radically different, which initially puzzles students. Even afterthey understand society’s role in the variation of ecologicalfootprint, it is not clear which policy choices lead to the signiﬁ-
cant differences.
IV. FOOTPRINTING IN THE CLASSROOM
Students are ready to footprint when they have back-
ground in energy and the “back of the envelope” calculation
of climate change and have some experience working with
data, uncertainty, and spreadsheets. In this section, I describethe activity, which includes warmup footprint calculations inthe small-class setting of Coleg-370. Afterwards, I commenton changes that I have made to incorporate simple footprint-
ing into a larger class setting in a statistical physics course.
These activities are not prescriptive and may be adapted todifferent courses and settings.
The footprint activity starts with guided discussion on an
item’s footprint that is (at least initially) uncomplicated. For
instance, I hold up a cup of tea and ask, “What is the carbon
footprint of a mug of hot water?”
12In a small class setting, a
whiteboard or a blackboard work well to keep track of thescope and to perform initial calculations. Although I don’t
explicitly say, this at the beginning, the initial round of dis-
cussion and calculation is really about the choices involvedin deﬁning the footprint.
I let students take a lead on the initial quantitative discus-
sion, with my role being more of a scribe and an occasionalguide. My students tend to gravitate to a simple thermody-
namical Q¼mcDTcomputation of the energy required to
boil the water. For instance, we might calculate the carbonproduced when burning natural gas to raise the temperatureof tap water to boiling. We ﬁnd a preliminary carbon foot-
print in terms of grams of CO
2using the carbon intensity we
found during the “back of the envelope” climate changecalculation.
Even during the initial discussion, students often ﬁnd the
multiple complications involved in even the simplest compu-
tations, but, if they do not, I push on the assumptions.
Suppose we ﬁnd an unrealistic footprint based on heating ona gas burner (about 4 g CO
2). I point out the assumption—
often not explicitly stated—that allthe heat of combustion
was transferred to the water. I prompt students to re-
consider, asking, “What about waste heat? If all the heat
went into the water and none was lost to the environment,wouldn’t we be comfortable holding our hand above the panwhile the water is heating up?” This observation returns us
to another round of quantitative discussion, deﬁning the
problem with more care, and reﬁning the computation. It isalso useful at this stage to look at more than one method ofheating. Depending on whether there is equipment
available—in Coleg-370 the kitchen was in an adjacent
room—the next stage of taking data can be completed duringthe ﬁrst class activity on footprinting.
Equipped with timers, information on the stoves, and elec-
trical consumption meters like “Kill-A-Watt” meters, stu-
dents boil water to reﬁne their initial calculations. They time
how long it takes to actually boil a cup of water on a burnerof known power. During these measurements, I encouragestudents to observe and record what they actually do.
715 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Seth A. Major 715 04 October 2023 22:56:50
For example, when boiling water on a stove or in an electric
kettle, normally we heat more than just one carefully mea-sured cup, while when heating water for tea in a microwavewe heat only the water that we intend to drink. For the calcu-lations involving heating with an electric kettle or a micro-wave oven, we use the local electrical mix on the grid fromenergy generation portion of the course.
At the end of these preliminary footprints, we re-discuss
how we deﬁned the footprints and the manner in which wecan communicate the results and note their limitations. Nowwith students more aware of the processes that may beincluded, we discuss whether to include the footprint of pota-ble water and waste systems. This reﬂection may lead us tonew deﬁnitions, calculations, and results. However, moreimportantly, the reﬂection leads to awareness of the scope ofpossible footprints. In most of these questions, the goal is not
only the “correct answer,” but also the consciousness of the
decisions that deﬁne our results. This is a key element of theapproach to footprinting advocated here. As in some under-graduate physics laboratories, the activity is a cyclical pro-cess of deﬁning, calculating and measuring, and reﬂecting onthe results. The activity highlights the choices and limitsinvolved in process-based carbon footprints. In addition, byexplicitly working through computations, students gain fullaccess to what is included in these computations, unlike theresults of an online footprint calculator. In this small-classsetting, the initial activity is accomplished in a single 75 minclass.
It is possible to adapt this activity to other class settings,
as I have done in a statistical physics course. In larger classsettings, the initial activity can be done with group workusing large, shared whiteboards for tables. (The physicsdepartment has cut 40 /C290 cm
2whiteboards for such discus-
sions.) Depending on the size of the class, this may requireTA’s to help guide the discussion. In my classes, at leastsome students have access to kitchens. This measurementportion is completed as homework in “dorm-kitchen labs”and then discussed in the next class meeting. In this moreconventional instructional setting, the activity is a discussiontaking less than one class period followed by homeworkactivities and an in-class discussion during which the ﬁnalvalues are found. In statistical physics courses, which lackthe coverage of energy systems included in Coleg-370, therenewable mix on the local grid and how much energy is lostin delivery are brieﬂy discussed in class.
For the ﬁrst full footprint of a product, I start with an item
that (at least some) students know well so they can applytheir understanding of the processes involved. We take morecare to note where numerical inputs have high relative uncer-
tainties, when different sources offer signiﬁcantly different
answers, and/or when the data is from a simple internetsearch. In addition to the blackboard, it is very helpful tohave cloud-shared documents and spreadsheets such as thosehosted on DropBox, Google Drive, or OneDrive. This waystudents can quickly share tips, work, and sources during thediscussion. Additionally, it is helpful to have access to a highquality published study with plenty of direct measurements,allowing one to dig into details (such as Ref. 13used in the
example below).
For example, in the Hamilton Adirondack Program, every-
one made food and participated in the Essex Farm CSA foodpickup. Some students interned on farms cultivating vegeta-bles and were familiar with plastic row covers, harvesting,refrigeration, tractor use (and parts required for repairs), andirrigation. We chose lettuce for the ﬁrst footprinting activity
and began with a discussion of contributing processes, divid-ing them into categories of “to the farm gate,” “to the storedoor,” and “to the dinner table.” While we eventually studiedall of these categories, we started with the “to the farm gate”footprint. An annotated spreadsheet of this footprint isincluded in the supplementary material.
1
To manage the problem, and to clearly mark what is included
in the footprint, it is essential to break down the product or pro-cess. On the blackboard, we brainstormed individual processesinvolved, asking, “How is the product made? Where do the partsor inputs come from? What do we include in the footprint?” Theresulting breakdown allows us to list smaller, manageable steps,to note needed data, and to deﬁne the calculation. The process ishighly customized to the product or process. In fact, this is astrength of the process-based assessment.
In the case of lettuce we asked, “Was the lettuce grown
outside or in a greenhouse? Was the crop conventionallygrown or organically grown? What is the tractor use? Is fer-tilizer used? Was there post-harvest cooling? What sort ofpackaging, if any, was used? How was the produce trans-ported? Do we need to include warehouse infrastructure?”The guides for the discussion were both the students’ experi-ence and the published study.
13We discussed of phrasing of
the results. For instance, what is the best unit to describe thefootprint, an acre, pound, calorie, head, or serving of lettuce?The students chose a head since it represents both a commonunit for the farm and the consumer.
Since 80% of lettuce consumed is conventionally grown,
in class we decided to ﬁnd the carbon footprint of a conven-tionally grown head of lettuce as it leaves the farm. (Later,we compared the result to the footprint of lettuce producedlocally.) Deﬁning this footprint and determining which datawe needed was conducted in a class discussion using boththe blackboard and the shared spreadsheet. During discus-sion students started to ﬁll in the footprints for individualprocesses such as tilling, working from knowledge of what isrequired, adapting the results in the published study,
13and
checking basic inputs such as the rate of diesel consumption.
Next we extended the result to the carbon footprint of a
conventionally grown head of lettuce as it arrives preparedon the dinner table. Developing these footprints allowed usto ﬁnd signiﬁcant contributions to the carbon emissions ofgrowing and delivering lettuce. Key possible contributionsincluded air freight, refrigerated transport, and greenhouseheating. The computations were done in teams focused ondifferent individual processes using the cloud-shared spread-sheet. Work was done both in class and in homework. Weincluded comments and citations of the sources in the
spreadsheet so we could both check our work and use the
spreadsheet as a reference for future footprints.
While the focus of Coleg-370 was not on society and pol-
icy, the Hamilton Adirondack Program did have such afocus. Reﬂecting on these results at the end of the fall harvestled to far ranging conversations. Discussions included ourchoice of diet and an apparent rural-urban split in the expec-tation of readily available lettuce in all seasons vs cabbageor pickled produce. Given the fossil-fuel-light farming meth-ods, including horses used at Essex Farm, we realized thatthe literature did not contain data on the carbon productionand sequestration on diversiﬁed farms such as Essex Farm,which suggested new research collecting the data.
Other early footprinting activities might include on-
campus initiatives such as end-of-year furniture swaps
716 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Seth A. Major 716 04 October 2023 22:56:50
(comparing furnishing rooms with new sofas, etc., versus
used furnishings from the swap), student-run coops, real-time energy monitoring systems, and on-campus compost-
ing. Ideally, these are student-driven or student-inclusive ini-
tiatives so that the students have knowledge and ownershipof the systems and processes. Once students have found sev-eral footprints and have access to a small library of exam-
ples, working independently becomes possible. Students
then have some basis to evaluate whether their footprintsmake sense.
In addition to footprints described in assigned reading in
Berners-Lee,
6we also studied carbon footprint analyses of
iPhones (leaning heavily on Apple’s version, e.g., Ref. 14,
and Berners-Lee’s critique6), solar panels, the 2016 Olympic
Games in Rio.15We created footprints for other locally pro-
duced goods, Hamilton College, and the Hamilton
Adirondack Program (see Appendix C ) in more detail. For
the Hamilton Adirondack Program assessment, we workedas a team, dividing the tasks of assessing housing, food, theguest speaker program, vehicle use, and outdoor activity
gear. By this point in the semester, it was not surprising to
see that travel was the main contributor of carbon in theHamilton Adirondack Program footprint ( Appendix C ). This
led to suggestions on how to change the program structure to
lower the carbon footprint. At the end of the footprint portion
of the course, students were able to independently completeprocess-based carbon footprint calculations. Every studentcompleted a new footprint as part of the ﬁnal exam.
For reasons of time, I have not adapted this detailed foot-
printing activity in my upper-level statistical physics class.
However, adapting the activity to a larger course using groupwork and a shared spreadsheet seems possible. Faculty prep-aration for the footprint activity includes running a few ofthese footprint analyses in advance. It is useful to work from
published work with plenty of direct measurements and to
keep open to new possibilities that students raise. One of thepleasures of teaching this subject is learning from studentinsights.
V. DISCUSSION
Saadia Zahidi of the World Economic Forum is quoted as
saying, “What you can measure, you can address.”
16
Footprinting offers a metric to prioritize solutions that
address climate change. The activity also serves as a bridge
between online “your footprint” calculators and summariessuch as in Ref. 6, and full-blown, careful studies, making the
process more transparent and instilling an understanding of
its power and limitations. The footprinting activity requires
background in energy and the basis of climate change, aswell as a facility with spreadsheets. For a ﬁrst footprint, itwas helpful to choose an item that the students knew well,
that wasn’t too complicated, and that had at least one solid
study to draw from. In Coleg-370 over the course of twoweeks, students developed a handful of process-based lifecycle assessment carbon footprints of products and activities.
In upper-level statistical mechanics courses, simple carbon
footprints can be included as in-class example and in home-work, although this omits the signiﬁcant lessons on scopeand deﬁnition that a longer unit includes.
Students in both these settings responded enthusiastically
to the inclusion of discussion of climate change and, in the
case of Coleg-370, to the “What can we do about it?” unitbased on footprints. Perhaps part of the reason is due to thesurprises: Purchased out of season air-freighted fruit? You
have bought a “big foot”, a footprint many times larger than
similar, locally produced food.
17Considering a change in
diet? A vegan diet can have as big a carbon footprint as a
meat-based diet, if the food travels by air. Computing the
impact through footprints offers a guide to change, whether
it may be national transportation policy or sealing leaks in
houses. The footprinting activity offered students a quantita-tive guide to changes to address climate change. Some life-
style changes, such as night setback temperatures or
different methods, to cook pasta were easy to implement.
We can draw from more comprehensive plans for green-
house gas reduction (see, for instance, Ref. 18) for potential
larger scale changes. I have not implemented curricular sup-
port for actions to address such changes.
In Coleg-370, assessment was through written feedback
and focused on the course goals (4) and (5). The students
welcomed the footprinting work as a guide to what might beaddressed to reduce carbon emission. For example, in reﬂect-
ing on the footprinting activity, one student wrote, “I know
that learning how much a footprint ﬂying, driving, and heat-
ing have has totally changed my perspective. I think having
footprint numbers on things like boarding passes, gas pumps,
and heating bills could really help to make people rethink
their usage … this information needs to be part of every dayto day activity…” Implementing footprinting activities in
physics courses creates opportunities for such a change in
perspective.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to thank the students in the
Hamilton Adirondack Program, Janelle Schwartz, and
Hamilton College for support. The author also would like to
thank the anonymous reviewers whose extensive commentshelped to shape the article.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂicts to disclose.
APPENDIX A: COLEG-370 COURSE DETAIL
In 2016, I was fortunate to teach in the Hamilton
Adirondack Program (HAP). This innovative program
founded by Janelle Schwartz blended coursework in the
Adirondack park with a deep engagement with the environ-
ment and the local community. The HAP offered students a
wide breadth of experiences from academics focused on both
global concerns and the local community to food production
and preparation to working in the area through internships.
The idea was to place global thinking on a quantitative
foundation and then apply this thinking to solutions on a
local level. To create the syllabus for the course, I worked
backwards from a “back of the envelope” calculation of cli-
mate change and footprinting. This climate change calcula-
tion is similar to what is done in Chapter 9 of Ref. 3and the
blog,
2both by Murphy. In preparation of this article, I
updated the teaching resources. Asking, “What backgroundis required to understand the calculation?” and “What skills
are required for the footprinting?” pointed toward material
717 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Seth A. Major 717 04 October 2023 22:56:50
content including the physics of energy and light and basic
chemistry. However, the questions also pointed to necessary
background in spreadsheets, unit conversions, and simple
quantitative analysis. I included earlier activities to introduceand practice these skills. Laboratories were tailored to thesite and integrated into the weekly assignments. In addition
to energy labs, we carefully modeled the heat ﬂow in resi-
dential structures including blower door testing on the cam-pus structures. In another (and favorite) lab, students builttheir own “homes,” small structures of their own design and
construction. The students tested the heat loss of their struc-
tures using electrical resistive heat and temperature loggers.
In the ﬁrst part of the course, I followed the “force-work-
energy” path towards understanding energy, essentially follow-
ing standard physics texts. Although I followed a philosophy
of “choose your favorite source,” I assigned reading by topicin Bloomﬁeld’s “How Things Work”
19and the algebra-based
Open Stax College Physics.20Additional useful texts include
Muller’s “…for Future Presidents” series, e.g., Ref. 21,
Murphy’s Energy and Human Ambitions on a Finite Planet ,3
and Wolfson’s Energy, Environment, and Climate .22The phys-
ics background ﬁnished with the basics of thermodynamics
with its beneﬁt of system-wide macroscopic thinking.
At this stage, the students’ work was a mix of qualitative,
quantitative, and working-with-numbers questions (signiﬁ-cant ﬁgures, basic uncertainty, agreement, unit conversion).They also built skills working with spreadsheets. Example
questions are in Appendix B . The tailored approach laid the
foundation for footprinting. We studied sources of power,locally, nationally and globally, electrical grids, electrical
energy mix. Although focused on the UK, MacKay’s
Sustainable Energy without the Hot Air
4is an excellent
source for this material. Murphy’s book offers a most recentpresentation more focused on North America.
3The course
also included a ﬁeld trip to visit to a local small-scale hydro-
power plant and guest speakers.
Although some students in Coleg-370 had extensive
undergraduate exposure to physics, most of the students saidthat they would not have taken a physics course on the
Hamilton College main campus. It was rewarding to observe
their success and valuable for all of us to hear different per-spectives, some of which were quite different than I usuallyhave in the physics classroom. Grading was based on weekly
homework questions, computations and short essays, into
which lab writeup incorporated, a midterm, and a ﬁnal.
APPENDIX B: EXAMPLE QUESTIONS
This is a sampling of questions from 2016 from the home-
work, quizzes, and labs.
•Do you do work while kneading bread? Explain youranswer. [Students had just started to make bread for the
community.]
•Explain why we often build structures with steeper roofsin the mountains than in the lowlands far from snowfall.
•Water descends in Gulf Brook from the Mountain House
to the Ausable River in Keene. What is the maximum
electrical energy that the water could generate in a day?Assume a ﬂow of 911 kg per day. Hint: You need onemore bit of information which is available on the topo
map. Compare this to the electrical energy consumed in
one day on site.•By now you have done a lot of reading and calculating on
hydro power. What role can hydro power play in the
Adirondack region electrical energy mix? Draw from our
conversations with Matt Foley [owner of small scale hyrdo
facility] in Westport, the EPA feasibility study, the previ-
ous problem, and your reading. Make sure that, in
MacKay’s words, your solution “adds up.”
•Find the carbon and ecological footprints of (a) 1 pint of
blueberries (375 g) ﬂown to Newark, NY from Lima, Peru
and trucked to the local Hannaford’s. You may want tofocus on the major contributing factors; (b) 1 pint of rasp-
berries grown at Essex Farm [the program’s CSA]; and (c)
1 pint of Essex Farm raspberries frozen for 3 months—
this is to mimic the out of season nature of (a). Comment
on the results. For yields use MOFGA’s estimates: “…
typical yields are 4,000 to 5,000 pounds [per acre].”
•Jenkins has a sustainable energy solution for the Adirondack
Park.23Summarize the solution and compare it to the sce-
narios in MacKay. Why are they so different? What are
some advantages and disadvantages of Jenkins’ solution?
(Does the park ‘belong’ to people living in it? To NY state?
To all? Are there beneﬁts to such local energy solutions?)
•Congratulations! You have been appointed to the
Hamilton College’s ‘Blue Sky’ Committee. (This body
actually existed, although the ofﬁcial title was the“Imagining Hamilton Committee”.) As the climate expert
on the committee, you are tasked with developing a plan
to accelerate Hamilton College’s Climate Plan so that the
college is climate neutral by 2030.
(a) Estimate the current carbon footprint of Hamilton
College. For data, use Berners-Lee and Hamilton
College’s FY 2016 primary energy, 2 :40/C210
6kWh
of electricity and 1 :14/C2106therms of natural gas.
Do not include student travel to and from the cam-
pus. Develop a spreadsheet for Hamilton College’s
total carbon footprint.
(b) Use MacKay, Jenkins, and Berners-Lee to map out a
climate neutral solution. Include the possible beneﬁtof the forest on the 1280 acre campus, about 800 of
which is forested. At this stage do not worry about
ﬁnancial constraints.
(c) Now discuss the feasibility of your plan.
(d) Submit an electronic version of your spreadsheet.
•What does Berners-Lee’s input-output model give for a
minimum emission for spending $1? Ponder this for a
while then give the argument for intentionally moderating
one’s consumption, i.e., spending those dollars.
•Re-run the numbers for a recently installed 3.92 kW sys-
tem that cost $4100 (installed, state and federal incentives
included). Please ﬁnd the expected annual energy savings,
payback period, the return on investment, “ﬁnancial
impact of solar panels,” and the CO 2payback period.
Assume a cost of electricity of $0.14/kWh, and the upstateelectrical mix of 51%, 27%, 16%, 4%, and 2% for gas,
nuclear, hydro, other renewables, and coal, respectively
(www.eia.gov for New York in July). Comment on this
system and the example Berners-Lee uses.
•The director of Physical Plant sends out an annual
“Building Heating” email—perhaps you have seen it—
writing, “make sure windows are closed in the cooler eve-
ning hours.” Still many windows are open around campus
during cold weather. To increase participation, what would
718 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Seth A. Major 718 04 October 2023 22:56:50
you add to this email on how windows operate? Many of us
have a tendency—I think—to view this email as a distrac-tion. How might the director circumvent this problem?
APPENDIX C: HAMILTON COLLEGE’S
ADIRONDACK PROGRAM FOOTPRINT
Program Footprint: One of the themes of the course was
to answer “What can we do about climate change?” As partof the focus on the local, we studied the HamiltonAdirondack Program’s carbon footprint and estimated it to
be about 4 tons of CO
2eper full-time community member
per semester, see Fig. 1. This was deﬁned through carbon
accounting for food, heat, electrical use, transport during thesemester (but not to and from the campus) for the full com-
munity. It did not include contributions from infrastructure
such as the campus buildings and methane emissions fromcomposting, See below for more discussion.
It is easy to see that transportation dominates the pro-
gram’s footprint. The transportation (personal “cars” and
program “suv’s”) results from the structure of the intern-
ships, food sourcing, and recreational activities. If reducingthe carbon footprint of the program is a goal, reducing thetransportation portion is probably the single most effective
step. This can be obtained, for instance, by clustering pro-
gram internships in the Keene-Lake Placid area so that stu-dents can both carpool more and can travel fewer miles.
The chief sources of uncertainty in the Program’s footprint
come from relatively poor heating and food production data.
Although our landlord was generous with access to the
energy suppliers, ultimately the heating data were not com-plete enough to use. We used average New York numbersfor heating. In any case, since the program extends only
about one month into the heating season, this contribution tothe footprint is not large. The other big gap in our data is the
footprint of Essex farm (and other local) food. This is highlyuncertain and we used a mix of US and UK studies in ourestimate.
It is early days yet for the carbon footprinting of colleges
and universities is in its infancy and comparisons may befraught with complications. The location of a campus plays alarge role in the footprint due to heating and/or cooling.Nevertheless, as a point of reference, one careful study ofLancaster University found about 2.5 tons of CO
2eper staff
and student member per semester. (The Higher EducationFunding Council for England has set carbon reductiontargets.)
a)Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the envi-
ronment, sustainability, and climate change.
b)Electronic mail: smajor@hamilton.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-4204-383X.
1See supplementary material online for an annotated spreadsheet.
2Tom Murphy, “Recipe for climate change in two easy steps,” web blogpost, Do the Math , 17 August 2011, <https://dothemath.ucsd.edu/2011/08/
recipe-for-climate-change/ >. I also include this curricular element in my
junior-level statistical physics courses as an application of blackbody radiation.
3Tom Murphy, Energy and Human Ambitions on a Finite Planet
(eScholarship, University of California, California, 2021), <https://escho-
larship.org/uc/energyambitions >.
4David MacKay, Sustainable Energy without the Hot Air (UIT, Cambridge,
England, 2009) <www.withouthotair.com >.
5The radiative forcing of key greenhouse gases is highly variable. For
instance, by integrating absorption spectra in the infrared, we see thatmethane is about 60 times more potent than CO
2. But methane chemically
breaks down faster in the atmosphere. Over the hundred year period, it is
about 28 times more potent than CO 2. For more details, see the IPCC
report (Ref. 24), Chapter 9 in Ref. 3, and Ref. 6and26.
6Mike Berners-Lee, The Carbon Footprint of Everything (Greystone
Books, Vancouver, 2022).
7At its heart, the work is nifty bit of linear algebra that tracks the outputs of
one sector of industry with the inputs of other sectors. The method was
created by Wassily Leontief, for which he received the Nobel Prize in eco-
nomics in 1973.
8W. Rees and M. Wackernagel, Our Ecological Footprint: Reducing
Human Impact on the Earth (New Society Publishers, Philadelphia, 1996).
9Global Footprint Network, <https://www.footprintnetwork.org >.
10Global Footprint Network, “Footprint calculator,” <https://www.footprint-
calculator.org/home/en >, accessed on November 29, 2022.
11EUSTEP (Enhancing Universities’ Sustainability Teaching and Practice
through Ecological Footprint), “Student and educator teaching material,”
<https://www.eusteps.eu/resources/student-educator-teaching-material/ >,
accessed on November 27, 2022.
12See Ref. 25for an approach using an electric kettle to explore energy use
and life cycle assessment.
13Almudena Hospido, Llorenc ¸ Mil /C18a i Canals, Sarah McLaren, Monica
Truninger, Gareth Edwards-Jones, Roland Clift et al. , “The role of season-
ality in lettuce consumption: A case study of environmental and social
aspects,” Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 14(5), 381–391 (2009).
14Apple, Inc., “Product environmental report: IPhone 14,” <https://www.
apple.com/environment/pdf/products/iphone/iPhone14PERSept2022.pdf >
accessed on November 29, 2022.
15“Rio 2016 carbon footprint report,” <https://library.olympics.com/Default/
doc/SYRACUSE/72060/carbon-footprint-management-report-rio-2016-
olympic-and-paralympic-games-organising-committee-for-th >accessed on
April 20, 2023.
16Kelsey Nowakowski, “Where in the world are women and men most–andleast–equal?,” Natl. Geographic Mag. 231(1), 28–29 (2017); available at link.
gale.com/apps/doc/LFDLNT132731826/NGMA?u=nysl_ce_hamilton&sid=bookmark-NGMA&xid=141da2b5 .
17It is rarely simple to determine whether a product traveled by air. However,
stores often include country of origin. Perishable foods that travel far are
often air-freighted. For example, fresh blueberries from Peru purchased in
the Adirondacks in December will carry a large foorprint due to air travel.
18Drawdown: The Most Comprehensive Plan Ever Proposed to Reverse GlobalWarming , edited by P. Hawkins (Penguin Books, New York, New York, 2017).
Fig. 1. The main contributions to the carbon footprint of the Fall 2016 HAP
program. The label “cars” refers to the use of student vehicles for all travelduring the fall, but not to and from campus; “suvs” represents the footprint
of the program vehicles based on actual mileage; “food” represents our esti-
mate for the footprint of food purchases; “heating” is a rough estimated foot-
print for heating the site buildings based on New York averages; “guest
speakers” refer to the footprint of the travel to and from the site, adjusted for
multipurpose trips; and “power” is the carbon footprint of the electrical
energy consumed based on energy mix in the [local area].
719 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Seth A. Major 719 04 October 2023 22:56:50
19Louis Bloomﬁeld, How Things Work: The Physics of Everyday Life , 6th
ed. (Wiley, 2009).
20P. Urone et al. ,College Physics Open Stax <https://openstax.org/details/
books/college-physics >.
21Richard Muller, Physics and Technology for Future Presidents: An
Introduction to the Essential Physics Every World Leader Needs to Know
(W. W. Norton, New York, 2009).
22Richard Wolfson, Energy, Environment, and Climate (Norton, New York,
2017).
23Jerry Jenkins, Climate Change in the Adirondacks: The Path to
Sustainability (Cornell U. P., Ithaca, New York, 2010).24“Climate change 2021: The physical science basis,” in Contribution of
Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change , edited by V. Masson-Delmotte et al.
(Cambridge U. P., Cambridge, 2022).
25J. DeWaters, S. Powers, and F. Bilow, “An introductory energy course to
promote broad energy education for undergraduate engineering students,”
Sustainability 13(17), 9693–9705 (2021).
26Robert J. Allen, Xueying Zhao, Cynthia A. Randles, Ryan J. Kramer,
Bjørn H. Samset, Christopher J. Smith et al. , “Surface warming and wet-
ting due to methane’s long-wave radiative effects muted by short-wave
absorption,” Nat. Geosci. 16(4), 314–320 (2023).
720 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Seth A. Major 720 04 October 2023 22:56:50
