
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| JANUARY 01 2022
Gamma camera imaging in an undergraduate physics
course 
Mary Lowe ; Alex Spiro ; Peter Kutt
Am. J. Phys.  90, 51–58 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0006168 04 October 2023 23:00:04
Gamma camera imaging in an undergraduate physics course
Mary Lowe, Alex Spiro, and Peter Kutt
Physics Department, Loyola University Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland 21210
(Received 4 April 2021; accepted 20 August 2021)
Gamma camera imaging is an important technique in nuclear medicine. It is capable of diagnostic
imaging of metabolically active areas and organ function and can be used to evaluate blood ﬂow inthe heart muscle, measure bone growth, detect tumors, and perform many other medical studies. It
is a real world application that integrates concepts in medicine, nuclear physics, geometric optics,
data processing, calibration, and image formation. This paper provides an overview of gamma
camera imaging intended for an intermediate-level undergraduate physics course for students
majoring in STEM disciplines. Because working with radioactive materials is not practical in oursetting, we use an approach involving paper-and-pencil exercises, a visible light apparatus, and
computer work.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006168
I. INTRODUCTION
Diagnostic nuclear medicine involves injection of drugs
labeled with radionuclides into the human body. These
drugs, called tracers or radiopharmaceuticals, are chosen forpreferential absorption in speciﬁc target tissues and provideinformation for a wide range of diseases. When the traceremits gamma ( c) rays, they are detected by a gamma camera
(also known as Anger camera), which produces a two-
dimensional image of the three-dimensional spatial distribu-tion of the tracer. The image reveals information about tissuefunction and biological processes underlying disease.Radionuclide imaging laboratories are now found in almostevery hospital in the US.
1More advanced gamma camera
systems, known as single-photon emission computed tomog-
raphy (SPECT), incorporate one or more rotating gammacamera heads to produce a set of planar images that arereconstructed into a three-dimensional image. The mostcommon uses of SPECT are static and dynamic imaging
studies
1to diagnose or monitor disorders of the brain, heart,
bone, thyroid, lung, liver, and abdomen.2Gamma camera
imaging can obtain quantitative information about physio-logical function and the molecular basis of disease withoutperturbing processes within the body.
3Other diagnostic tech-
niques, such as X-rays, computed tomography, and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), show anatomical changes due to
abnormalities.
Gamma camera imaging (GCI) is an important application
of nuclear physics and a major topic in the medical physicscurriculum. However, it is not usually included in the under-graduate physics curriculum. This paper describes how we
have introduced GCI in an intermediate-level physics course
appropriate for undergraduates majoring in science and engi-neering disciplines who have had 1–3.5 years of physicscoursework. By including more applications of physics inthe undergraduate curriculum, we hope to help students
majoring in other disciplines appreciate the importance and
relevance of physics.
Our semester-long course surveys diagnostic and thera-
peutic techniques used in medicine, including eyeglasses,ﬁber optics, ultrasound imaging, computed tomography(CT), positron emission tomography (PET), MRI, in additionto GCI. The portion devoted to nuclear physics, PET and
GCI lasts about four weeks. During that time, we cover
many of the topics found in the nuclear physics chapter of astandard introductory physics textbook. For the portion on
radioactive decay, for example, we relate the half-lives ofradionuclides to medical applications,
14C-dating, nuclear
power, and nuclear weapons. The penetration depth of a,b,
andcradiation through various materials is also discussed.
For most undergraduate programs, the cost of a real
gamma camera is prohibitive, and it is not feasible for a largeclass of untrained students to work with radioactive materi-als. We, therefore, designed several types of apparatus thatuse visible light to model the key physical principles of thegamma camera. For GCI, the level of presentation in Kane
4
is appropriate for our students, but we have enriched the
reading with experimentation, demonstrations, paper-and-
pencil and computer activities, and lectures. Other usefulreferences are Refs. 1and5.
II. OVERVIEW
A. Radiopharmaceuticals
To perform GCI, a drug containing a c-ray-emitting radio-
nuclide is introduced into the body. Radiopharmaceuticalsare an active area of research and are designed to be prefer-entially absorbed by certain organ systems and disease path-ways. For most applications, the c-ray photon has an energy
in the 30–250 keV range.
6For example, one of the primary
radionuclides used with a gamma camera is technetium-
99m, which emits 140 keV crays and has a half-life of
6.02 h.1
B. Gamma camera
The simplest gamma camera consists of one head, as
shown in Fig. 1. The components are housed in a box that is
positioned on one side of the patient’s body. The tracer
inside the patient emits crays isotropically. A lead or tung-
sten collimator, consisting of an array of holes, constrainsthe angle of crays that can pass upwards into the detection
system. The collimator is essential for producing images ofthe spatial distribution of tracer particles. After passingthrough the collimator, gamma radiation enters a large scin-tillator typically made of a NaI(TI) crystal. When absorbed
in NaI(Tl), each c-ray photon creates a burst of blue ﬂuores-
cent photons. The blue photons pass through a light guideand are detected by 30–90 photomultiplier tubes (PMTs)
51 Am. J. Phys. 90(1), January 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 51 04 October 2023 23:00:04
arranged in a two-dimensional (2D) array, which convert the
scintillator light into electrical pulses.5The light guide ena-
bles the blue burst to be spread across multiple PMTs, whichturns out to be critical for good spatial resolution (see Sec.
III B 3 ). The detector electronics shapes the pulses, digitizes
the pulse heights, and sends the digital signals to a computerwhere the x-y position of each c-ray photon is calculated.
The coordinates of all photons are binned into a 2D array
of pixels, and a histogram is constructed.
1The net result is
an image of the body, where the pixel intensity is propor-tional to the number of c-ray photons in each pixel bin
(Fig. 2). 10,000–20,000 counts are recorded each second,
depending on the study. The challenge is to teach studentshow PMTs with a diameter of several centimeters can
image the tracer distribution with a spatial resolution of a
few millimeters.
III. TEACHING GAMMA CAMERA IMAGING TO
UNDERGRADUATES
We divide the curriculum into three sections: (1) collima-
tion, (2) detection, and (3) computer processing. We model
the gamma camera with visible light replicas, allowing
students to see directly how the rays propagate through theapparatus. The components used in the apparatus are listed
in the supplementary material.
7
A. Collimator and the point spread function
After the radiopharmaceutical is administered to the
patient, it accumulates in certain regions of the body andemits crays. The goal is to determine the locations of the
tracer. Even though crays are electromagnetic radiation, a c-
ray image cannot be created using traditional optical techni-ques because gamma emission cannot be focused, and the
direction of crays is difﬁcult to determine.
The collimator is introduced using a paper-and-pencil
exercise for a one-dimensional (1D) array of holes and a sin-gle point source S that emits crays isotropically (Fig. 3).
Students do a ray tracing exercise to determine whether c
emission passes through the collimator or is blocked by its
lead septa, which results in a narrowly directed propagationofc-ray photons at the output of the collimator. The number
of photons passing through the ith hole ( i¼0,61,62, …) is
proportional to h
i, the angle subtended by that hole. Students
measure hiwith a protractor, construct a bar graph of the dis-
tribution of crays, and plot each value at the center of the
hole. To match drawings in nuclear medicine textbooks5and
learn about ﬁtting, they then ﬁt the data to a Gaussian func-
tion (Fig. 3) and estimate the full width (FW) of the point
spread function (PSF). Other ray tracing exercises, withvarying levels of difﬁculty, can also be assigned to explore
the dependence of the PSF on geometric parameters d,b,
andh.
While the true PSF must be calculated in three dimen-
sions, we introduce it by deriving the irradiance function I(x)
Fig. 1. Basic components of the gamma camera.
Fig. 2. Upper body, planar bone scan using the radiopharmaceutical99mTc-
methylene diphosphonate. In this posterior view, over- and underlying
organs are superimposed on each other. The image is constructed photon-by-photon. The original bone scan of the whole body is located in the sup-
plementary material (Ref. 7).
52 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Lowe, Spiro, and Kutt 52 04 October 2023 23:00:04
for the planar collimator geometry shown in Fig. 3, in which
the collimator holes are spaced by period palong the
x-direction, and the analysis is conﬁned to a plane. This
approximation shows the essential features of the problem
and is easier to visualize. The cross-sectional shape of real
collimator holes does not enter this analysis. The derivation
appears in the supplementary material.7The result is
IxðÞ¼Iotan/C01 dL/C0jxjh
L2þx2 ðÞ /C01
4h2þd2 ðÞ2
43
5;d
2/C20jxj/C20dL
h;
IxðÞ¼Iotan/C01dLþh
2/C18/C19
Lþh
2/C18/C192
þx2/C01
4d2/C18/C192
66643
7775;jxj/C20d
2:
(1)
Source S can be located anywhere beneath the collimator.
The origin of the x-axis is chosen to coincide with the loca-
tion of S. I(xi)is the irradiance at xi, where xiis the position
of the center of the ith hole, bis the vertical distance between
the source and the bottom of the collimator, dis the hole
width, h is the thickness of the collimator, L¼bþh/2, and Iois ﬁtted to the data. The angle subtended by each hole iis
equal to I(xi)/Io. For the geometry shown in Fig. 3,x¼0 for
the hole directly above S, and x¼6p;62p;and63pfor the
adjacent holes. The quantity in the square brackets of Eq. (1)
corresponds to tan ho, tan h1, etc. The solid dots in the ﬁgure
represent the irradiance, given in Eq. (1), at each hole.
The FW of the PSF can be determined approximately by
inspecting the geometry shown in Fig. 3.A n g l e ais the upper
limit for radiation to pass through the collimator. Therefore,
tana¼d
h¼1
2FW PSF
bþh(2)
or
FW PSF¼2dðbþhÞ
h:
A real gamma camera collimator consists of thousands of
holes with round, hexagonal, or square cross sections.5
Typical dimensions are: hole diameters 0.2–3 mm, holelengths 30–58 mm, and septal thickness 0.1–1.05 mm.
8,9Our
model of a 2D collimator consists of a hexagonal array ofround holes Figs. 4(a) and4(b) created by drilling a dark
gray plastic sheet (3/16
00thick) with a laser. The number of
stacked plastic sheets can be varied. Tracer point sources arerepresented by three LEDs (Vernier Color Mixer kit, Fig. 4(c))
with a 9.2 mm center-to-center distance. The brightness of theLEDs can be adjusted independently. A sheet of paper tapedto the collimator output shows the hexagonal pattern of therays that pass through the collimator (Fig. 5(a)).
Suppose the goal is to image the heart, and there are two
tracer point sources separated by a distance D
source along the
x-axis. Each source is associated with a PSF. What is the
minimum Dsource such that the two PSFs can yield medically
useful information? To address this issue of spatial resolu-tion using the model apparatus, students use two LEDs andvary borh. In Fig. 5(b) top ( b/C255 cm), the PSF spots are
well separated. In Fig. 5(b) bottom ( b/C2510 cm), the FW
PSF
is broader and the spots start to merge. By sketching qualita-
tive graphs of the intensity proﬁles of the two spots, studentsattempt to ﬁnd a criterion for when the spots are barely dis-tinguishable. The conclusion is related to the Rayleigh crite-rion discussed in introductory textbooks.
10The collimator
resolution1is approximately1
2FW PSF, which improves
when bord/hdecreases (see Eq. (2)). A demonstration of an
Fig. 3. Exercise to determine the point spread function of a c-ray source.
Students are given a 1D collimator and a point source S drawn on a sheet of
paper. The dark shaded regions are lead septa opaque to crays. The number
ofc-ray photons passing through hole iis proportional to the angle hisub-
tended by each collimator hole. Students construct a bar graph of the inten-
sity (stripe) and ﬁt a Gaussian to the measured intensities (solid line). The
solid dots correspond to the exact irradiance function values for each hole
(Eq.(1)). Equation (2)for FW PSFis determined from this geometry.
Fig. 4. Parallel hole collimator. (a) The holes are laser-drilled into 200/C2200/C23/1600gray PVC type 1 plastic sheets to form a hexagonal lattice. (b) The sheets
are stacked and aligned with drill rods, and the assembly is held together with tape or rubber bands. The hole diameter is 1.2 mm; the nearest-neighbor, center-
to-center spacing pis 2.60 mm; the row separation is 2.25 mm. (c) Apparatus for viewing the output of the collimator. Light source A consists of red, green,
and blue LEDs, mounted on an optical bench. The center-to-center distance Dsource is 9.2 mm. Collimator B is situated b¼3 to 20 cm away from A. A sheet of
white paper C is taped onto B at the output. Students view C.
53 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Lowe, Spiro, and Kutt 53 04 October 2023 23:00:04
L-shaped source is shown in Fig. 5(c)and leads to a discus-
sion of medical applications of imaging.
For a single LED, the FW PSFcan be experimentally deter-
mined by measuring the distance between the outermost illu-minated holes that appear on the paper sheet of thecollimator along the center horizontal line of the spot, asshown by the arrow in Fig. 5(a).A s bis increased, the crite-
rion for measuring the FW
PSFis the appearance of rays at the
far edges of the outermost holes (Fig. 6); the distance
between the edges is equal to (n-1)p þd, where n is the num-
ber of holes. A comparison between experimental results andthe prediction of Eq. (2)is shown in Fig. 6. The accuracy is
limited by the ﬁnite size of the light source and by the uncer-tainty in the source-to-collimator distance b.
The collimator can serve as a rich source of challenge
problems. (a) For the planar geometry shown in Fig. 3,w h a t
is the irradiance at the output of each hole as the source ismoved parallel to the array of holes? The answer is given inthe supplementary material.
7(b) Consider a 3D collimator
with a 1D array of holes with a ﬁxed depth and a rectangularor circular cross section, illuminated by an isotropic pointsource. How does the length of the holes transverse to thedirection of the array affect the irradiance? In the supplementary
material,
7we derive the exact irradiance function for rectangular
holes and ﬁt it to the experimental data of Fig. 6.T h er e s u l t sf o r
square and circular holes are similar but the irradiance for circu-
lar holes drops off a little faster with x.( c )A PYTHON program
template for simulating light patterns from planar apertures is
available in Ref. 11. Extending this template, students can simu-
late the light pattern from a 3D collimator with cylindrical holes.See the supplementary materials
7for sample assignments that
have been completed by undergraduates.
B. Detection system and determination of xy coordinates
of a c-ray photon
After a c-ray photon passes through the collimator, it is
detected by a system comprised of a scintillator crystal, a
light guide, an array of photomultiplier tubes (PMTs), elec-tronics, and computer. We developed a model apparatus(Fig. 7) for students to visualize how detection occurs and to
understand how to compute the location of the tracer to
within a fraction of the diameter of a PMT.
1. Fluorescent red plastic as analogue
of scintillator crystal
A typical scintillator consists of a single crystal of sodium
iodide doped with thallium with a thickness of 0.95–1.5 cm
and a lateral dimension ranging from the size of a thyroid(/C2510 cm) to the width of a human body (40–60 cm). When a
c-ray photon interacts with a scintillator crystal, free elec-
trons are produced that excite electrons from the crystal’s
valence band to the conduction band. The dopant thalliumcreates additional energy levels within the band gap. Anelectron in the conduction band can relax to the valence
band via these intermediate levels, causing the emission of a
photon with wavelength in the 350–500 nm range.
12For
each c-ray photon that interacts with the scintillator crystal,
thousands of violet-blue photons are produced isotropically.
The index of refraction of NaI is 1.839 at 435.8 nm.13
We model this process (Fig. 7) using a green diode laser
(k¼532 nm, 3–5 mW) aimed upwards to mimic cemission
that has passed through a co llimator hole. A sheet of red ﬂuores-
cent acrylic (Estreetplastics, 0.23000thickness, k¼599 nm at
ﬂuorescence maximum) acts as the scintillator crystal and emitsorange photons isotropically when excited with green laser pho-tons. Students will notice that ﬂuorescence occurs at the lower
boundary of the material, but the instructor needs to point out
that in an actual scintillator crystal, the emission of visible lightcan occur anywhere within its thickness.
2. Acrylic sheet as analogue of light guide
We use an acrylic rod with a 2
00diameter to mimic a PMT;
this diameter is approximately the same as that of PMTs in a
real gamma camera. Students expect that to detect the pho-
tons, PMTs should be placed directly on the scintillator. Aquick test with the model apparatus will show that imagingcannot be done in this way. When an array of PMT rods is
placed directly on top of the ﬂuorescent plastic, essentially
all of the light exiting the plastic is collected by the roddirectly over the laser due to total internal reﬂection (TIR)
within the plastic, and the rays exiting the scintillator crystal
are concentrated above the ﬂuorescence (Fig. 8(a)). Even if
the effects due to TIR are reduced with a layer of water
Fig. 5. Output of the collimator for small and large values of b. Distance
between holes p¼2.60 mm. (a) Single LED source, d¼1.2 mm, h
¼18.3 mm, b/C254 cm (top), b/C2510 cm (bottom). Each arrow marks the cen-
ter horizontal line of the spot. (b) Two LEDs, with Dsource ¼9.2 mm, show-
ing the effect of the PSF upon the ability to distinguish the sources at the
output. d¼1.2 mm, h¼18.3 mm, b/C255 cm (top), b/C2510 cm (bottom). (c)
Five LEDs arranged in an L-shape. As b increases, the L becomes less clear.
Fig. 6. Measurements of FW PSFfor varying b. Hole diameter d¼2.1 mm;
thickness of collimator h¼75.1 mm. The photo shows rays at the far edges
of the outermost holes of the illuminated area at the output of the collimator.
The FW is measured from the left edge to the right edge.
54 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Lowe, Spiro, and Kutt 54 04 October 2023 23:00:04
between the plastic and the PMT rods, one rod still collects
most of the light due to the small distance between the ﬂuores-
cence and the rod. Therefore, the location of the laser ( cray)
w o u l do n l yb ed e t e r m i n e dt ow i t h i na200diameter circle. This
is inadequate for most medical purposes.
For medical imaging, the location of each c-ray point
source must be determined to within a few millimeters. A
light guide is used to spread the scintillator light across thearray of PMTs. As shown in a ray tracing exercise, by having
a light guide and optical grease between the scintillator and
light guide, and between the light guide and PMTs (Fig. 8(b)),
TIR is eliminated. If the light guide is thick enough, the light
will spread across multiple PMTs.
In the model apparatus (Fig. 7), the light guide is a com-
mercially available, 1.302
00thick, clear acrylic sheet ( nclear
¼1.4660.02 at 650 nm, McMaster-Carr). A few milliliters
of water are placed on the ﬂuorescent plastic ( nﬂuor¼1.48
6.02 at 650 nm, hc¼42.4/C14), and the light guide is positioned
on top in such a way that the water can spread uniformly with
no bubbles. The water mimics optical grease, reducing TIR
by replacing air at the interface of the two sheets. The thick-ness of the clear acrylic must be sufﬁcient for there to be ameasurable amount of light over multiple PMT rods.
3. Centroid algorithm and 1D array of 2
00acrylic rods as
analogue of 1D PMT array
To determine the location of a c-ray photon, students use a
model apparatus consisting of a 1D array of ﬁve 200-diameteracrylic rods, each with a length of 400and unpolished end
faces, to mimic a 1D PMT array (Fig. 7(c)). Measurements
are improved by placing a moist paper towel between the
light guide and rods to diffusively scatter the light and spreadit among more rods. Without the paper towel, we believethere are microscopic air bubbles in the water layer that leadto TIR at the end face. The paper towel also reduces dripping
as the students work with the apparatus, and markings on the
paper towel help align the rods and laser. As the laser ismoved, mimicking different positions of the c-ray photon,
variations in light intensity are seen at the top of the PMT
rod array, and students can intuitively estimate where the
light source is located.
To calculate the position of the light source quantitatively,
a silicon photodiode detector (Thorlabs DET100A) is used tomeasure the light intensity at the top of each PMT rod. A
reﬂective cone is mounted at the photodiode input to collect
light from the entire end face of the rod (Fig. 7(a)). To deter-
mine the position of the light source, a centroid calculation isperformed using Nvoltage values obtained from NPMT
rods ( N¼5 in Fig. 7(c))
/C22x¼X
N
i¼1sixi/C30XN
i¼1si; (3)
where siis the signal from the ith PMT (with background
subtracted) centered at x i.
Figure 9shows that the calculated x positions are consis-
tently less than the true values with the discrepancy increasing
Fig. 7. Detection system for the teaching apparatus. (a) Two-dimensional model. A green laser, representing a c-ray photon that has passed through the colli-
mator, causes orange ﬂuorescence that passes through a light guide into a hexagonal lattice of cylindrical rods mimicking a PMT array. The rods are coa ted in
silver paint or aluminum foil. (b) Output of 19 “PMT” rods. (c) One-dimensional model with ﬁve PMT rods. Water mimics optical grease and is located
between the ﬂuorescent plastic and the light guide. A wet paper towel is placed between the light guide and rods to scatter the light more uniformly. Gra ph
paper is placed on the breadboard to align the laser and PMT rods and to measure the position of the laser.
55 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Lowe, Spiro, and Kutt 55 04 October 2023 23:00:04
for larger x. This is due to the large diameter of the PMT rods
and the small number of PMT rods in the teaching apparatus.Multiple types of nonlinearities exist in real gamma cameras,and various procedures and algorithms are used to improveposition accuracy.
1Knoll et al. obtained a graph similar to
Fig.9for a real gamma camera, using a cubic spline for inter-
polation.14We developed a simpler procedure that uses the
polynomial ﬁtting feature in Excel; students are given calibra-
tion data to determine the degree of the polynomial that bestﬁts the data. Then they position the laser at an arbitrary loca-tion, acquire voltages from the PMT rods, do a centroid calcu-lation, and use the polynomial ﬁt to determine a more accuratelocation of the laser. The result is sensitive to the alignment of
the laser and PMT rods. While a 5th degree polynomial is
adequate for the graph in Fig. 9, we do not expect a polynomial
will ﬁt the data well for a larger array of rods.
4. Centroid algorithm and 2D array of 2
00acrylic rods as
analogue of 2D PMT array
A real gamma camera incorporates a hexagonal array of
30–90 PMTs. We model this using 19 PMT rods arranged ina hexagonal lattice (Fig. 7(a)). As the laser source is shifted
manually, different PMT rods are illuminated (Fig. 7(b)).
Calculation of the source position ( /C22x;/C22y) is achieved with a
2D centroid calculation that is equivalent to the algorithmoriginally developed by Anger. See the supplementarymaterial
7for a proof. In our classes, we demonstrate the 2D
gamma camera, teach students how to calculate the centroid,
and provide them with a dataset of light intensity values from19 rods. Then for homework, they calculate the position of
the laser using Excel. Our students do not correct for distor-
tion, but this topic could be explored in an advanced lab.
C. Gamma camera electronics
Gamma camera electronics consists of photon counting
detectors operating in the pulse mode, where each event, i.e.,
each interaction between a c-ray photon and the scintillator
crystal, is processed individually. There are multiple levelsof detail for presenting the electronics used for detection of
c-ray-emitting radionuclides, and instructors must decide
which level is suitable for their students. A discussion ofpedagogical aspects appears in Parks and Cheney.
15A brief
overview is given here.
The energy of a c-ray photon is deposited in the scintilla-
tor crystal, emitting optical photons isotropically in a quan-tity proportional to the absorbed energy. The optical
scintillation photons are detected by the PMT array, where
the output of each PMT is a current pulse with a duration ofa few nanoseconds and a total charge that is proportional to
the number of scintillation photons striking the tube’s photo-
cathode.
12Since the scintillation photons from each event
are detected by multiple PMTs in the array, the sum of the
outputs from all PMTs is proportional to the total energy
deposited by the c-ray photon.4Pulse-height-analysis of the
Fig. 9. Importance of corrections in GCI. The calculated position of the light
source is compared to the known position for a 1D array of PMT rods. The
source is shifted right starting from the center of the apparatus at x¼0.
Several positions are shown in the inset. The solid line is the ideal case,where the calculated position is equal to the location of the light source. The
dotted line is a 5th degree polynomial ﬁt of the true positions vs the mea-
sured positions.
Fig. 8. Ray tracings done by students to show the purpose of the light guide.S represents the burst of visible photons produced by one c-ray photon. For
the model apparatus, ﬂuorescence occurs at the bottom of the plastic, but in
a scintillator crystal, the photon burst may occur anywhere in the depth of
the material. (a) No light guide and no optical grease. TIR is present. (b)
Light guide and optical grease allow the rays to spread across multiple
PMTs.
56 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Lowe, Spiro, and Kutt 56 04 October 2023 23:00:04
summed outputs reveals a photopeak occurring when the full
energy of the c-ray photon is converted to visible light within
the scintillator. However, the response of the scintillator is
more complex and includes effects such as Compton scatter-
ing within the patient or the scintillation crystal, X-rays fromimpurities or lead shielding, backscatter, and object scatterwithin the patient.
1,12To improve the signal-to-noise ratio
and contrast in the gamma camera image, a discriminator
(i.e., window) is set around the photopeak. For each eventwithin the photopeak window, the voltage pulses from thePMTs of the array are processed collectively to determine
the position of the c-ray photon.
1The resolution of the ﬁnal
image is determined by the intrinsic resolution of the detec-tion system and the resolution of the collimator; the latterdominates the total spatial resolution.
5
As an example, each radioactive decay of99mTc produces
140 keV of emitted c-ray energy. The scintillator NaI(Tl)
produces approximately 4.7 /C2103visible photons per c-ray
photon, or one visible photon per 30 eV of c-ray energy.16
The discriminator window is set to 140 610 keV in order to
reject noise and pulses resulting from scatter.1Event rates on
the order of 105c-ray photons per second6can be processed
by the gamma camera electronics.
D. Computer simulation of a gamma camera scan with
moving bed
To help students gain a better understanding of how an
image is formed using a gamma camera, a simulation of apatient with pheochromocytoma, a tumor of the adrenal
glands, is included in the supplementary material.
7
Simulation “wholebodybed.py” was written in PYTHON 3.7,
VPYTHON , and associated libraries obtained from the
Anaconda3 distribution. The user can edit the count rate,
number of points, etc. Binning into a pixel array is not done
in the simulation. A movie ﬁle of the simulation is includedin the supplementary material along with a description.7The
simulation, which is based on the work of Buck et al. ,17
shows a simpliﬁed version of a whole body gamma camera
scan in which the position of each c-ray photon is plotted on
the screen at a rate slow enough for students to see how theimage is created dot-by-dot over time, where each dot corre-
sponds to the position of a c-ray photon that passes through a
collimator hole. The patient is initially positioned so that thehead and neck are imaged. Gradually, the bed moves so that
the torso followed by the legs is scanned, and a planar view
of the entire body forms over time. The gamma camera scan
shows a high concentration of a radiopharmaceutical on the
right side of the torso (left side in the image) in the vicinity
of the kidney and bladder.
While not clearly visible in the simulation, Buck et al.
state that the gamma camera and SPECT images show two
lesions in the adrenal glands. They also show the importanceof multimodal imaging techniques such as SPECT/CT, in
which functional and anatomical images are co-registered to
locate the disorder more accurately.
IV. NEW DIRECTIONS
GCI is an evolving technique. Since its inception, there
have been several important innovations. The positioning of
the gamma camera over the patient and the operation of the
equipment have become more automated. The need forthree-dimensional information has led to the growth of
SPECT, in which multiple gamma camera scans are con-
ducted from different angles around the body. Algorithms,
known as ﬁltered back projection (FBP),
1are applied to a set
of planar scans to reconstruct images of thin cross sections
of the body. Figure 10shows an example of how SPECT can
image blood ﬂowing through heart muscle using a procedureknown as myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI).18On the
left, the plane of the image slice is shown, which cannot be
acquired by a single gamma camera scan; in the recon-
structed image slice on the right, the wall of a healthy left
ventricle appears doughnut-shaped. In our course, we discuss
SPECT because of its prevalence in hospitals and in the liter-
ature. Filtering refers to mathematical operations applied tothe images to reduce blurring, smooth out noise, etc. While
concepts underlying FBP are outside the scope of this paper,
we cover the basic ideas in class, in the unit on CT, and also
assign readings in Kane.4We demonstrate the effects of ﬁl-
tering using software.
New detector technologies are being developed that are
capable of MPI, small-animal imaging, molecular breast
imaging, and other applications that require high spatial res-olution, good image quality in a practical length of time, and
lower doses of radiopharmaceuticals.6Solid-state detectors
for gamma cameras have been introduced, in which c-ray
photons are absorbed by a semiconductor material such as
cadmium zinc telluride (CZT). The CZT is pixelated (pixel
size 2.5 /C22.5 mm) with a direct readout from each pixel. A
collimator is still required but no scintillation crystal, PMTs,or centroid calculation are needed.18
There are also specialized gamma cameras dedicated to cardi-
ology studies. For example, the D-SPECT camera uses square-
shaped detectors arranged in a semicircle around the heart. The
detectors are composed of nine CZT blocks that move indepen-
dently.18This is advantageous because in a gamma camera
designed for whole body scanning, only a small fraction of the
collimator and scintillator are used to obtain the heart image.19
A camera speciﬁcally designed for the heart can be situated
closer to the patient’s chest and allows more ﬂexibility in
patient positioning,18resulting in superior images.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Martin Lodge and Aimei Kutt
and also acknowledge Yanko Kranov, Nancy Donaldson,
Fig. 10. Cross-sectional image of the heart using SPECT. Image of the left
ventricle wall was obtained using MPI, a technique that is conducted to
determine areas of damaged coronary muscle. Image plane (left) and light
gray regions (right) show where blood is ﬂowing in the muscle. A full set of
color image slices from three perpendicular directions appears in the supple-
mentary material (Ref. 7).
57 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Lowe, Spiro, and Kutt 57 04 October 2023 23:00:04
Randy Jones, Patrick Doty, Jay Wang, and Ernie Behringer
for their many contributions. This project was supported byNSF TUES Award No. DUE-1140406.
1S. R. Cherry, J. A. Sorenson, and M. E. Phelps, Physics in Nuclear
Medicine , 4th ed. (Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia, 2012), pp. 5, 58,
141–145, 195–197, 200, 204, 211–213, 216, 222, 230, 256–260, 366–367.
2O. Israel, L. Pellet, D. Biassoni, E. De Palma, E. Estrada-Lobato, G.Gnanasegaran, T. Kuwert, C. la Fougere, G. Mariani, S. Massalha, D.
Paez, and F. Giammarile, “Two decades of SPECT/CT—The coming of
age of a technology: An updated review of literature evidence,” Eur. J.
Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 46, 1990–2012 (2019).
3David A. Mankoff and Daniel A. Pryma, “The contribution of physics to
nuclear medicine: Physicians’ perspective on future directions,” EJNMMI
Phys. 1, 5 (2014).
4Suzanne A. Kane, Introduction to Physics in Modern Medicine , 2nd ed.
(CRC Press, New York, 2009), pp. 242–243, 259–298.
5M. A. Lodge and E. C. Frey, “Nuclear medicine imaging devices,” inNuclear Medicine Physics: A Handbook for Teachers and Students , edited
by D. L. Bailey, J. L. Humm, A. Todd-Pokropek, and A. van Aswegen
(International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 2014), pp. 312–353,
392–394. <http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/Pub1617web-
1294055.pdf >
6T. E. Peterson and L. R. Furenlid, “SPECT detectors: The anger camera
and beyond,” Phys. Med. Biol. 56(17), R145–182 (2011).
7See the supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/10.0006168 for “Equipment list.pdf” and “Equipment list.xlsx”;
“Two derivations of the exact irradiance functions of a collimator”;
“Software assignments for modeling a collimator” courtesy of E.
Behringer; “Proof that Anger logic is equivalent to a centroid algorithm”;
“Simulation of gamma camera imaging with a moving bed”; and “Bone
Scan.JPG” and “Cardiac SPECT.JPG” Bone and cardiac images courtesy
of Dr. Martin Lodge; heart image from <https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Heart.svg >.8H. G. Kang, H. Tashima, S. J. Hong, and T. Yamaya, “Optimization of a
high resolution small animal SPECT system using GATE and STIRSoftware,” in 2018 IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium and Medical
Imaging Conference Proceedings (NSS/MIC) (2018), pp. 1–3.
9I. Marin, R. Ryden, M. Van Essen, J. Svensson, N. Gracheva, U. Koster, J.
R. Zeevaart, N. P. van der Meulen, C. Muller, and P. Bernhardt,
“Establishment of a clinical SPECT/CT protocol for imaging of161Tb,”
EJNMMI Phys. 7, 45 (2020).
10D. Halliday, R. Resnick, and J. Walker, Fundamentals of Physics
Extended , 10th ed. (John Wiley and Sons, NJ, 2014), pp. 1091–1094.
11E. Behringer, “Shadows (ray optics),” <https://www.compadre.org/
PICUP/exercises/Exercise.cfm?A ¼Shadows&S ¼1>.
12Glenn F. Knoll, Radiation Detection and Measurement , 3rd ed. (John
Wiley and Sons, NJ, 2000), pp. 232, 266, 280, 307–312, 317–328.
13G. E. Jellison, Jr., L. A. Boatner, J. O. Ramey, J. A. Kolopus, L. A.
Ramey, and D. J. Singh, “Refractive index of sodium iodide,” J. Appl.
Phys. 111, 043521 (2012).
14G. F. Knoll, D. R. Strange, and M. C. Bennett, “Radiation signal process-
ing system,” U. S. Patent No. 4,212,061 (July 8, 1980).
15James E. Parks and Christine P. Cheney, “Compton scattering of Cs-137
gamma rays,” in 2015 BFY Proceedings , edited by M. Eblen-Zayas, E.
Behringer, and J. Kozminski (AAPT, Maryland, 2015).
16G. L. Zeng, J. R. Galt, M. N. Wernick, R. A. Mintzer, and J. N. Aarsvold,“Single-photon emission computed tomography,” in Emission
Tomography: The Fundamentals of PET and SPECT , edited by M. N.
Wernick and J. N. Aarsvold (Academic Press, Cambridge, 2004),pp. 127–152.
17A. K. Buck, S. Nekolla, S. Ziegler, A. Beer, B. J. Krause, K. Hermann, K.Scheidhauer, H.-J. Wester, E. J. Rummeny, M. Schwaiger, and A.Drzezga, “SPECT/CT*,” J. Nucl. Med. 49, 1305–1319 (2008).
18E. Piekarski, A. Manrique, F. Rouzet, and DLe Guludec, “Current status
of myocardial perfusion imaging with new SPECT/CT cameras,”Seminars Nucl. Med. 50(3), 219–226 (2020).
19E. V. Garcia, T. L. Faber, and F. P. Esteves, “Cardiac dedicated ultrafast
SPECT cameras: New designs and clinical implications,” J. Nucl. Med.
52, 210–217 (2011).
58 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Lowe, Spiro, and Kutt 58 04 October 2023 23:00:04
