
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| JUNE 01 2022
Gravitoelectromagnetism: Removing action-at-a-distance in
teaching physics 
Friedrich Herrmann ; Michael Pohlig
Am. J. Phys.  90, 410–415 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009888
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Gravitational waves physics using Fermi coordinates: A new teaching perspective
Am. J. Phys.  (June 2021)
Hidden mechanical momentum and the field momentum in stationary electromagnetic and gravitational
systems
American Journal of Physics  (June 1997)
Non-machian, Lorentz-invariant inertia: The first step towards the theory of GravitoElectroMagnetism
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 1999) 04 October 2023 23:10:12
Gravitoelectromagnetism: Removing action-at-a-distance
in teaching physics
Friedrich Herrmanna)and Michael Pohligb)
Abteilung f €ur Didaktik der Physik, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, D-76128 Karlsruhe, Germany
(Received 21 March 2021; accepted 7 March 2022)
Gravitation is still taught largely in a way that suggests the existence of action-at-a-distance. A theory
without such shortcomings, gravitoelectromagnetism, was proposed by Heaviside in 1893, but it didnot become well-established because many effects it describes are very small and the later emergence
of general relativity seemed to make a theory of gravitoelectromagnetism superﬂuous. We argue
that gravitoelectromagnetism still retains relevance in the physics curriculum because it by nomeans describes only tiny effects and does not demand the mathematical level of general relativity.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009888
I. INTRODUCTION
Anyone teaching gravity who does not wish to invoke
general relativity does so in essentially the way Newton for-
mulated it. Newtonian mechanics originated at a time when
there was no concept of physical ﬁelds and one had to be sat-isﬁed with invoking action-at-a-distance. Similarly, Newtondid not say anything about energy for it did not yet exist as a
physical quantity, and even after it was introduced, it could
not be localized; that is, it was not possible to specify anenergy density and an energy current density until about theend of the 19th century (Ref. 1, pp. 1180–1181). Even today,
the language of energy still retains the ﬁngerprints of its
action-at-a-distance origins: If a body is lifted, we say thatthe potential energy of the body increases, knowing full well
that this energy is not stored within the body.
2We can cir-
cumvent action-at-a-distance by speaking of a “gravitationalﬁeld,” but this leaves unanswered questions as to its energycontent, mechanical stress, and how the energy ﬂows within
the ﬁeld. One does not typically discuss, for example, the
energy density of the ﬁeld or what path the energy takesfrom the ﬁeld to a falling body.
The later development of the ﬁeld concept by Faraday and
Maxwell in the theory of Electromagnetism (EM) could have
served as a model for a more modern theory of gravitation.
Such a theory, Gravitoelectromagnetism (GEM), was in factformulated by Heaviside and is structured in close analogy
to Maxwell’s theory.
3GEM closes the gap between
Newtonian mechanics and general relativity. Like EM invacuum, GEM operates with two ﬁeld strengths. One ofthem is the gravitational ﬁeld strength g, which is also called
the gravistatic ﬁeld strength and whose source is the mass
density; this is analogous to the electric ﬁeld strength E,
whose source is the electric charge density. The other is thegravinetic ﬁeld strength b, whose source is the mass current
density; this is analogous to the magnetic B-ﬁeld, whose
source is the electric current density. We have adopted theterms gravistatic and gravinetic from Krumm and Bedford.
4
While it is common to introduce gwhen treating gravita-
tion, the gravinetic ﬁeld strength bis not usually mentioned
because its effects are typically miniscule. As an example,we consider the rotating Earth, which generates a b-ﬁeld and
thus exerts a force on, say, an airplane. If we assume that an
aircraft of 400 tonnes ð400 000 kg Þis ﬂying at 1000 km =h
due east at the equator, this results in a “gravitationalLorentz force” of about 1 lN; that is, the aircraft effectivelybecomes about 0 :1 mg lighter. This calculation is detailed in
Appendix A .
In our opinion, the smallness of GEM effects should not
be an argument against introducing students to b.T h e
action of the gravitational Lorentz force is an interesting
phenomenon and gives us a better understanding of gravita-
tion by revealing an analogy. A more important reason to
introduce bis that it is a factor in the energy current density
of the gravitational ﬁeld, and here, its effect is not at all
tiny. The reason for this is that while benters quadratically
into the forces (i.e., the momentum currents), it enters linearly
into the energy current. Thus, we believe that GEM still has
merit today and that it deserves a place in the pedagogical cur-riculum. Several other authors have advocated this as well;
see, for example, Refs. 4(p. 362), 5(p. 889), and 6(p. 422).
In Sec. II, we compare the equations of GEM with those
of EM, and in Sec. III, we explore some of the consequences
of these differences via examples, focusing on mechanical
stresses (momentum current density) and the energy density
and energy current density of the gravitational ﬁeld. Section
IVoffers a few concluding remarks.
It is important to point out that three years after the
appearance of general relativity, Thirring showed that a
gravitoelectromagnetic description of gravitational effects
emerges by linear approximation of Einstein’s equation and
for small velocities.
7A comprehensive overview of the his-
torical development of this description can be found in Iorioand Corda
8(pp. 2–5) and is discussed in numerous publica-
tions.8–11While the Heaviside approach is a theory in ﬂat
space and therefore cannot describe general relativistic
effects like gravitational waves or the Lense–Thirring effect,
the Thirring approximation constructs GEM ﬁelds in such a
way that such effects can be described locally. One recog-
nizes that these are two different theories by the fact thataccording to Thirring’s theory, a factor of 4 occurs in the
“Lorentz force” equation, which also propagates into the
energy current density (Poynting vector). In contrast, this
factor does not exist in the Heaviside theory, which we
explore.
As this paper was being ﬁnalized for publication, we
became aware of another paper to be published in this jour-
nal which examines energy ﬂows in gravitational ﬁelds from
a Newtonian perspective where ﬁelds respond instantly to
the motions of charges and masses, an approach that con-
trasts with our formulation.
12Curiously, both approaches are
410 Am. J. Phys. 90(6), June 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 410 04 October 2023 23:10:12
able to explain energy ﬂows. We encourage readers to exam-
ine both papers for a full picture of this historically important
issue.
II. THE EQUATIONS
In this section, we compile the most important equations
of EM and GEM, beginning with the four Maxwell equationsand their GEM analogs. These are followed by expressions
for the energy density, the energy current density, the force
(momentum current), and the mechanical stress (momentumcurrent density). In the case of EM, the force is the Lorentz
force and the energy current density is the Poynting vector.
Maxwell’s equations (EM, GEM):
r/C1E¼
1
e0qQ; (1)
r/C1B¼0; (2)
r/C2E¼/C0@B
@t; (3)
r/C2B¼l0jQþ1
c2/C1@E
@t; (4)
r/C1g¼/C01
egqm; (5)
r/C1b¼0; (6)
r/C2g¼/C0@b
@t; (7)
r/C2b¼/C0lgjmþ1
c2/C1@g
@t: (8)
Energy densities (ED, GEM):
qE¼e0
2E2; (9)
qE¼1
2l0B2; (10)
qE¼/C0eg
2g2; (11)
qE¼/C01
2lgb2: (12)
Energy current densities (ED, GEM):
S¼1
l0E/C2B; (13)
S¼/C01
lgg/C2b: (14)
Forces (momentum currents) (ED, GEM):
F¼QEþv/C2B ðÞ ; (15)
F¼mgþv/C2b ðÞ : (16)
Mechanical stresses in the direction of the ﬁeld lines (ED,
GEM):rk¼e0
2E2; (17)
rk¼1
2l0B2; (18)
rk¼/C0eg
2g2; (19)
rk¼/C01
2lgb2: (20)
Mechanical stresses perpendicular to the ﬁeld lines (ED,
GEM):
r?¼/C0e0
2E2; (21)
r?¼/C01
2l0B2; (22)
r?¼eg
2g2; (23)
r?¼1
2lgb2: (24)
We have used the following abbreviations:
eg¼1
4pGandlg¼4pG
c2:
We have written the mechanical stresses [Eqs. (17)–(24) ]
separately for a purely electric (or gravistatic) ﬁeld and a
purely magnetic (or gravinetic) ﬁeld in both the direction ofthe ﬁeld lines and transversely to them. These expressions
follow as special cases from the stress tensor given in
Appendix B .
Merely considering the signs of the various quantities
reveals some interesting qualitative differences between EM
and GEM. In Sec. III, we examine the consequences of the
opposite sign of the mechanical stresses and the energy den-sity and then consider the energy current density distribution
in some examples.
III. CONSEQUENCES
A. Mechanical stress in the gravitational field:
Momentum current density
When treating gravitation we usually emphasize that an
essential difference between gravitation and electricity is
that while there are “two kinds” of electricity, there is onlyone “kind” of mass, which we take as positive. Positive
masses attract each other while like electrical charges repel
each other. However, these categories of attraction andrepulsion imply action-at-a-distance physics, whereas we
want here to formulate the differences between gravitation
and electricity via the properties of ﬁelds.
Equations (17)–(24) indicate us that the signs of the stress
within gravistatic and gravinetic ﬁelds are opposite to those
of electromagnetic ﬁelds, a fact originally pointed out by
Heaviside.
3In EM ﬁelds, there is tensile stress in the direc-
tion of the ﬁeld lines and compressive stress orthogonal to
the ﬁeld lines;13in gravitational ﬁelds, there is compressive
stress in the direction of the ﬁeld lines for both the g-and
411 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 F. Herrmann and M. Pohlig 411 04 October 2023 23:10:12
b-ﬁelds and tensile stress transverse to them. Because
mechanical stresses are equivalent to momentum currentdensities, we can say that for analogous arrangements of thesources of the ﬁelds, the ﬂow direction of momentum cur-rents in GEM ﬁelds is opposite to that in corresponding EMﬁelds.
14With this in mind, we consider the distribution of
mechanical stress for a simple geometry, ﬁrst in the electriccase and then in the gravitational one.
Our system is a hollow sphere bearing a uniformly distrib-
uted positive charge as sketched in Fig. 1(a). The interior of
the sphere is known to be free of ﬁeld. If the sphere is madeof an elastic material, it will inﬂate when charged. The tradi-tional action-at-a-distance description is that the charges onthe surface repel each other. A problem with such a descrip-tion is that the straight lines connecting the “repulsing” partsof the surface have to run through the ﬁeld-free interior. Aphysically better description would be as follows: “The ﬁeld
is under tensile stress in the direction of the ﬁeld lines. The
ﬁeld lines end on the surface of the sphere and the tension ispassed on to the sphere, with the result that the electric ﬁeldpulls outward on the sphere.”
Now for the gravitational analog. Consider a thin spherical
shell of mass m
0as sketched in Fig. 2(a). As in the electric
example, its interior is ﬁeld-free. Since positive massesattract each other, the shell would shrink, but it is preventedfrom doing so because it is made of solid material. In terms
of ﬁelds, we should regard the gravitational ﬁeld as pushing
on the shell from the outside.
Similar statements can be made for the b-ﬁeld. Instead of
a hollow sphere, consider a hollow cylinder or a tube movinglongitudinally. The interior of the tube is ﬁeld-free. Usingthe “Lorentz force” equation, we can conclude that the dif-ferent parts of the tube lying on one circumference “repel”each other. In terms of ﬁelds, we can express this as follows:
The gravinetic ﬁeld pulls on the tube. It follows that the ﬁeldis under tensile stress in the direction orthogonal to the ﬁeldlines. Just as in the electromagnetic analog, however, themechanical stresses in the b-ﬁeld are smaller by a factor of
v
2=c2than in the g-ﬁeld, where vis the velocity associated
with the mass ﬂow.
B. Energy density
It is easy to see that the energy density in the gravistatic
ﬁeld is negative. Consider ﬁrst the electromagnetic case, Fig.1(a). If we imagine compressing the sphere while keeping
the charge constant [Fig. 1(b)], the ﬁeld at some point out-
side the original sphere does not change. But as the sphereshrinks, new ﬁeld is created in space that was previouslyﬁeld-free. We had to supply energy to create this additional
ﬁeld, and this energy is stored in the newly generated ﬁeld.
The energy density in the electric ﬁeld is given by Eq. (9).
Now apply the same reasoning to the sphere of mass in
Fig.2. As the sphere shrinks, there is again a region of space
which was ﬁeld-free but is now occupied by a ﬁeld.However, we did not have to supply energy to shrink thesphere; rather, we gained energy. If we stick to the idea thatwe can always specify an energy density, we must concludethat the ﬁeld has a negative energy density, Eq. (11). These
considerations extend to the b-ﬁeld, but again the values
involved are very small.
C. Energy current density
Whenever a body moves up or down in the gravitational
ﬁeld of the Earth, it exchanges energy with the ﬁeld so-called potential energy. During such an exchange, an energycurrent ﬂows within the ﬁeld, and this can be calculated withEq.(14). While benters quadratically into the mechanical
stresses and thus into the forces, it appears to the ﬁrst powerin the formulae for the energy current density, Eq. (14).A sa
consequence, the b-ﬁeld manifests itself much more clearly
in energy currents than in forces (momentum currents).
Figure 3illustrates a simple example, which was proposed
by Krumm and Bedford.
4A long rod of mass mis pulled
upwards, perpendicular to the Earth’s surface.
Energy is supplied, which enters the rod from above. The
energy ﬂow (power) at the top of the rod is calculatedaccording to the following classical formula:
P¼v/C1F: (25)
Here, vis the velocity of the rod and Fis the gravitational
force whose magnitude is
F¼mg: (26)
As the force within the rod decreases from top to bottom, the
energy ﬂow also decreases. We ask for the decrease DPof the
energy ﬂow in a small height interval Dh,s e eF i g . 3(a).DPis
that part of the energy ﬂow which is transferred from the matterof the rod to the gravitational ﬁeld within this interval. We ﬁrstwrite the force as a function of the height h:
F¼mhðÞg¼q
mAhg ; (27)
where qmis the mass density of the rod. Thus, the energy
ﬂow through a sectional plane at the height hisFig. 1. (a) The electric ﬁeld pulls outward on the sphere. (b) If the sphere is
compressed while the charge is held constant, new ﬁeld is created. For this,
energy has to be supplied to the system.
Fig. 2. (a) The gravistatic ﬁeld pushes on the sphere. (b) If the sphere isallowed to shrink with the mass kept constant, new ﬁeld is created. For this,
energy has to be removed from the system.
412 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 F. Herrmann and M. Pohlig 412 04 October 2023 23:10:12
P¼vF¼vqmAhg : (28)
Since the mass ﬂow is
Im¼vqmA; (29)
the energy ﬂow can be written as
P¼Imgh: (30)
We are interested in the decrease DPof the energy ﬂow in
the height interval Dh:
DP¼ImgDh: (31)
This energy ﬂow exits the rod into the gravitational ﬁeld.
We now ask what our GEM equations predict for this
energy ﬂow. We calculate the energy ﬂow DP’in the gravi-
tational ﬁeld exiting the rod through the cylindrical shell ofheight Dh:
DP
0¼2prDhS: (32)
To determine the energy current density S, we need the
gravistatic and the gravinetic ﬁeld. The g-ﬁeld of the rod is
so weak compared to that of the Earth that we need not con-sider it. The b-ﬁeld is easily obtained from Eq. (8). Its mag-
nitude is
brðÞ¼l
gIm
2pr: (33)
Since gandbare perpendicular to each other, we get the
magnitude of Sfrom Eq. (14)as
S¼gb
lg: (34)
With Eq. (33),Sbecomes
S¼gIm
2pr: (35)
Inserting Sinto Eq. (32), we get
DP0¼ImgDh; (36)
which agrees with Eq. (31).Thus, Heaviside’s theory consistently describes our local
energy balance: The energy ﬂowing away from the rod via
the ﬁeld is equal to that ﬂowing into the rod from above.
This result also shows that there cannot be a factor 4 in the
equation for the energy ﬂow, as is the case in the Thirring-type representations of GEM. Apparently, the Heaviside and
Thirring theories correspond to two different mappings of
EM onto gravitation.
Up to this point, we have calculated only the energy cur-
rent density near the surface of the rod. The question of the
total current density distribution is more difﬁcult because it
has sinks in the ﬁeld and the current density distributionextends out into areas far from the rod. To circumvent this
problem, we consider a different example, that of a heavy
rope running over two pulleys. This is sketched in Figs. 4
and 5. The rope can equivalently be imagined as water
ﬂowing in a pipe.
To determine the path of the energy within the gravita-
tional ﬁeld, we need the g-andb-ﬁelds. We again neglect
the contribution due to the rope; the g-ﬁeld is simply that of
the Earth. The b-ﬁeld is an old acquaintance, having the
same form as that of two parallel wires carrying oppositely
directed currents; see Fig. 6. The vector multiplication g/C2b
Fig. 3. (a) A rod is pulled from the top. In the process, energy ﬂows within
the rod from top to bottom. (b) This energy gradually leaves the rod
sideways.
Fig. 4. In the left part of the rope, the energy ﬂows within the rope upward,in the right part downward. In the process, its current strength increases
upwards in the left part and decreases downwards in the right part. The cir-
cuit is closed by the gravitational ﬁeld in which the energy ﬂows from the
right to the left part of the rope.
Fig. 5. Energy ﬂow corresponding to Fig. 4, schematically.
413 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 F. Herrmann and M. Pohlig 413 04 October 2023 23:10:12
is straightforward, and the streamlines of the energy ﬂow are
orthogonal to the b-ﬁeld lines. Energy transport is largely
localized to the vicinity of the two sections of the rope and isa large effect, well known from daily life.
In setting up this arrangement, note that two conditions
have been met: (1) The energy ﬂux distribution has no sour-ces or sinks within the gravitational ﬁeld, and (2) each
energy streamline runs in a plane, so the distribution can be
represented in a cross-sectional plane. Both conditions areautomatically satisﬁed for any closed mass ﬂow such as anarbitrarily-shaped water circuit or a rotating vertical wheel.
IV. CONCLUSION
In order to avoid action-at-a-distance without using gen-
eral relativity, one can describe classical gravity with ﬁelds.To do so, it is necessary to introduce the gravinetic ﬁeld bin
addition to the usual g-ﬁeld. This results in a theory, gravi-
toelectromagnetism, which is analogous to Maxwell’s elec-tromagnetic theory. A striking and consequential differencebetween EM and GEM involves some reversed signs. Theenergy densities of both the g-andb-ﬁelds are negative, and
the mechanical stresses in the GEM ﬁeld are reversed with
respect to those in the EM ﬁeld: Compression becomes ten-sion and vice-versa. Using energy density and energy ﬂuxdensity, the local energy balance for the gravitational ﬁeldcan be formulated in the context of gravitoelectromagnetism.In particular, the concept of potential energy can be replacedwith a modern concept of energy stored in ﬁelds.
APPENDIX A: GRAVITATIONAL LORENTZ FORCE
ON AN AIRPLANE
Electromagnetic forces are much stronger than gravita-
tional forces; for example, the electrical repulsion between
two protons is some 10
37times stronger than their gravita-
tional attraction. Easily observable gravitational forces resultonly for bodies with very large mass, such as the Earth. Inaddition, gravinetic forces are typically smaller than gravi-static forces by a factor v
1/C1v2/c2, where v1and v2are the
velocities of the interacting bodies.
To get an idea of the magnitude of gravinetic forces, con-
sider an airplane of 400 tonnes ð400 000 kg Þﬂying eastward
above the equator. The surface of the Earth is also moving in
the eastward direction. So we have what can be compared to
two electric currents ﬂowing parallel to each other in thesame direction. The corresponding conductors or charge car-riers are known to attract each other.To solve the plane problem, we would have to calculate
the gravinetic ﬁeld of a rotating sphere but that is mathemati-
cally quite complicated. However, since we are only inter-
ested in the order of magnitude of the effect, we map thisproblem onto the geometry of a charge moving parallel to
the axis of a current-carrying wire. We replace the rotating
Earth with a massive cylinder 1000 km in diameter movingalong its symmetry axis. To calculate the mass ﬂow, we also
need the density of the cylinder, which we take to be q¼4
/C210
3kg/m3. As the speed, we choose the speed of the sur-
face of the Earth, i.e., about 1700 km/h. The airplane ﬂies atspeed 1000 km/h relative to the Earth, so as “seen from out-
side”, i.e., in an inertial frame in which the center of the Earth
is at rest, the velocity of the plane is 2700 km/h ¼750 m/s.
We assume a ﬂight altitude of 10 km.
We obtain a mass current I
mof the passing cylinder of
about 1.5 /C21018kg/s. Setting r¼5.1/C2105ma n d lg¼4pG/
c2in Eq. (33) gives a b-ﬁeld strength of /C244.3/C210/C015s/C01.
With v¼750 m/s, the magnitude of the corresponding force
from Eq. (16) is then F¼mvb/C241.3/C210/C06Newtons. The
direction of the force is away from the cylinder, effectivelylightening the plane by about 0.1 mg.
APPENDIX B: THE MAXWELL STRESS TENSOR
AND ITS GEM ANALOG
The expressions given in the text for the compressive and
tensile stresses in the electromagnetic ﬁeld can be summa-rized in a single tensor equation, the well-known Maxwell
stress tensor:
T
ij¼e0EiEjþ1
l0BiBj/C0e0
2E2þ1
2l0B2/C18/C19
dij: (B1)
The analog gravitoelectromagnetic tensor is
Tij¼/C0eggigj/C01
lgbibjþeg
2g2þ1
2lgb2 !
dij: (B2)
A comparison of Eqs. (B1) and(B2) shows that compres-
sive and tensile stresses are swapped. From Eq. (B2), one
can directly read our Eqs. (19) and(20) as well as (23) and
(24) and, just as in the electromagnetic case, derive the
Lorentz force equation.
a)Electronic mail: f.herrmann@kit.edu
b)Electronic mail: pohlig@kit.edu
1G. Mie, “Entwurf einer allgemeinen Theorie der Energie €ubertragung,”
Sitzungsber. Kaiserl, Akad. Wiss. CVII , 1113–1181 (1898). “One single
form of energy is left, which could possibly be called potential energy in
the usual sense of mechanics: The energy of gravitation. The magnitude ofthis form of energy does not… depend on the physical state of the matter
and of the ether, but only on the mutual position of several discrete bodies
in space. Therefore, it is also called energy of position. From the deﬁnition
of localizability given in Sec. IIIit is immediately obvious that an energy
of position cannot be localized.”
2H. Dehnen, “ €Uber den Energieinhalt statischer Gravitationsfelder nach der
allgemeinen Relativit €atstheorie in Newtonscher N €aherung,” Z. Phys. 179,
96–101 (1964).
3O. Heaviside, “A gravitational and electromagnetic analogy,” Electrician31, 281–282 (1893).
4P. Krumm and D. Bedford, “The gravitational Poynting vector and energy
transfer,” Am. J. Phys 55(4), 362–363 (1987).
5D. Bedford and P. Krumm, “On relativistic gravitation,” Am. J. Phys.
53(9), 889–890 (1985).
Fig. 6. Horizontal section through the arrangement of Fig. 4. The g-ﬁeld
lines point into the plane of the drawing. From the right to the left section ofthe rope, the energy ﬂows through the gravitational ﬁeld.
414 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 F. Herrmann and M. Pohlig 414 04 October 2023 23:10:12
6E. G. Harris, “Analogy between general relativity and electromagnetism
for slowly moving particles in weak gravitational ﬁelds,” Am. J. Phys.
59(5), 421–425 (1991).
7H. Thirring, “ €Uber die formale Analogie zwischen den elektromagneti-
schen Grundgleichungen und den Einsteinschen Gravitationsgleichungen
erster N €aherung,” Phys. Z. 19, 204–205 (1918).
8L. Iorio and C. Corda, “Gravitomagnetism and gravitational waves,” Open
Astron. J. 4(Suppl 1-M5), 84–97 (2011).
9M. L. Ruggiero and A. Tartaglia, “Gravitomagnetic effects,” arXiv:gr-qc/
0207065v2 (2008).10H. Kolbenstved, “Gravitomagnetism in special relativity,” Am. J. Phys.
56(6), 523–524 (1988).
11B. Mashhoon, “Gravitoelectromagnetism: A brief review,” arXiv:gr-qc/
0311030v2 (2008).
12V. M. Vasyliunas, “How energy is conserved in Newtonian gravity,” Am.
J. Phys. 90(6), 416–424 (2022).
13F. Herrmann, “Energy density and stress: A new approach to teaching
electromagnetism,” Am. J. Phys. 57, 707–714 (1989).
14G. Heiduck and F. Herrmann, “Momentum ﬂow in the gravitational ﬁeld,”
Eur. J. Phys. 8, 41–43 (1987).
415 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 F. Herrmann and M. Pohlig 415 04 October 2023 23:10:12
