
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkJANUARY 01 2022
Gravitational lens effect revisited through membrane waves 

Stefan Catheline  
 ; Victor Delattre ; Gabrielle Laloy-Borgna ; Fréderic Faure ; Mathias Fink
Am. J. Phys.  90, 47–50 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0006612
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Modeling swimsuits
Physics T oday  (August 2008)
English focus prosody processing and production by Mandarin speakers
J Acoust Soc Am  (October 2017)
Unfolding of a diblock chain and its anomalous dif fusion induced by active particles
J. Chem. Phys.  (April 2019) 04 October 2023 22:59:54
Gravitational lens effect revisited through membrane waves
Stefan Catheline,1,a)Victor Delattre,1Gabrielle Laloy-Borgna,1Fr/C19ederic Faure,2
and Mathias Fink3
1LabTAU, INSERM, Centre L /C19eon B /C19erard, Universit /C19e Lyon 1, Univ Lyon, F-69003, LYON, France
2Institut Fourier, Universit /C19e de Grenoble, Grenoble, France
3Institut Langevin ESPCI, Universit /C19e de Paris, Paris, France
(Received 15 November 2020; accepted 18 September 2021)
By means of experiments and curved manifold simulations, we show that wave propagation past a
topological deviation on a two-dimensional ﬂat fabric membrane is analogous to gravitational
lensing. Using an ultrafast camera, we track a membrane plane wave as it crosses a local warped
depression. Finite difference simulation, based on the scalar wave equation in a Schwarzschildmetric, fully describes the experimental wavefront shape. Comparison between the theoretical and
experimental deviation of wave geodesics from straight lines shows that (i) the nonlinear behavior
of fabrics due to stretching induces second order effects only and (ii) the experimental depressionis closely approximated by the Schwarzschild metric of a gravity well. The experiment
demonstrates, in a simple way, how wave propagation is inﬂuenced by the topology of the
transmission medium.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006612
I. INTRODUCTION
Gravitational lensing was the second experimental valida-
tion of Einstein’s theory of general relativity.1Observations
by Eddington during the solar eclipse of 1919 conﬁrmed pre-dictions of light deviation due to a massive object.2
Numerous other astronomical observations have beenreported since then.3These have all demonstrated that light
waves follow the geodesics of the space-time manifold.4
Previous demonstrations have illustrated these geodesicsusing spheres rolling on a rubber surface.5Although imper-
fect,6the analogy between satellite orbits and the orbits of
balls on a warped rubber membrane provides a beautifuldidactic illustration of gravity from the general relativisticpoint of view. Mechanical waves are also inﬂuenced bygeometry.
7We show that elastic waves on a fabric mem-
brane follow a geodesic: they abandon the straight lines of a
two-dimensional ﬂat surface when a topological scatterersuch as a locally warped depression (akin to a gravity well)is placed in their path. The experimentally observed devia-tions agree well with simulations of light wave propagation
based on the Schwarzschild metric and so constitute a classi-
cal analogy of a gravitational lens in astronomy.
II. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
The experiment was conducted with a fabric membrane
stretched over a 25 cm diameter drum pad (Fig. 1). Different
fabrics were tested: swimsuit, pantyhose (tights), and sweater(pullover). The sweater fabric was 100% cotton (MCSCavaliere, IMC9031, Valdagno Italy), and a 2-cm gridaligned with the ﬁber orientation was drawn on it. Waveswere launched using a wooden ruler which was carefully
positioned along the main direction of the ﬁbers to avoid
undesirable nonisotropic effects of propagation across thefabric membrane.
A warped depression was created in the fabric by pulling
down on a single ﬁber by 2 cm. This formed a so-called“gravity well,” as shown in the magniﬁed inset of Fig. 1. The
center of this region M, where the fabric membrane is maxi-
mally stretched and barely continuous, represents the masssingularity. Point E in Fig. 1represents an observation point
on Earth in analogy with the Eddington experiment.
A drumstick was then used to apply a strong tap to the
center of the wooden ruler (Fig. 1) at time t¼0 ms, launch-
ing a wave with wavefront parallel to the ruler. This can be
seen as the bright line in the top left snapshot ( t¼1.7 ms) of
Fig.2. An ultrafast camera captured images at a 2.8 kHz rate
(0.36 ms/frame). Phase tracking algorithms
8were used to
extract the particle velocity map from pairs of consecutiveframes for each point on the fabric membrane. In the ﬁgure,
color (online) is used to represent horizontal particle veloci-
ties: red and blue represent rightward and leftward motions,respectively. Estimates of the maximum particle velocity,
the membrane wave speed, and the central frequency are
1.1 mm s
/C01, 7.2 m s/C01, and 700 Hz. A movie can be viewed
in the supplementary material.8The wavefront at t¼1.7 ms
appears as the red line segment in the bottom left snapshot ofFig. 2. Initially, as it propagates across the ﬂat surface, the
wavefront remains a straight line. The black arrows perpen-
dicular to the wavefront indicate the direction of propagationof the wave across the fabric, similar to light rays emitted by
distant stars. As the wave approaches the warped depression
M(t¼7.1 ms, Fig. 2, center snapshots), the wavefront is
modiﬁed. The wave slows down and appears to be stopped at
the exact location of the singularity. Farther from M, the
wave bends around the gravity well, and the wavefront dis-continuity gradually disappears during the continued wave
propagation. The wavefront bending is still apparent at
t¼8.9 ms, when the wave reaches the observation point E
(Fig. 2, right snapshots).
How can these observations be interpreted? Two opposing
effects inﬂuence wave propagation across the fabric. On the
one hand, the membrane wave in the warped gravity well
region obeys a general rule observed in the most nonlinear
stretched media: it propagates faster. On the other hand, thegravity well creates a longer path, as the wave is forced to
follow the membrane topology and travel along the third
dimension, so that in two dimensions, it appears to slowdown. Since we observe the latter in these experiments,
topology (or geometry) is the dominant inﬂuence on mem-
brane wave behavior.
47 Am. J. Phys. 90(1), January 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 47 04 October 2023 22:59:54
III. THEORY AND SIMULATION
How does geometry explain the change in shape of the
plane wave? A straightforward initial approach to this prob-
lem treats the wave as an ensemble of rays. This approach is
applicable when the wavelength is small compared to the
length scale over which material properties vary. In our mem-
brane experiment, the mean wavelength is /C241 cm, which is
indeed smaller than the gravity well radius and depth of
/C242 cm. The geodesic is the line that a ray follows in a curved
space. This can sometimes be computed analytically, yielding
paraboloids such as the white curves in Fig. 3(a). Only the
general trends of the geodesic in the gravity well are neededto determine the global features of the wavefront. Far from
the gravity well, the geodesic is a straight line, and no devia-
tion is expected. When closer, the geodesic is bent in the
direction of the gravity well: rays passing to the right of thewell are deviated to the left, and vice versa. This is indicated
by the black arrows in Fig. 2att¼7.1 ms (bottom row, cen-
ter). The geodesic that points directly at the central singularityof M is more complex, but is not necessary in a ﬁrst global
qualitative approach, and will not be considered here.
Elsewhere, the black arrows in Fig. 2ﬁt the circumﬂex shape
of the wavefront at t¼7.1 and t¼8.9 ms and conﬁrm the geo-
metric origin of the deviation of the fabric membrane waves.
A more accurate wave propagation model is now consid-
ered. This consists of a 2D ﬁnite difference simulation code
of a scalar wave ﬁeld. The general wave equation in a curved
manifold is discussed in the supplementary material.
8The
Schwarzschild metric is valid in the neighborhood of a non-
rotating black hole, or more generally near any large mass
such as a star and planet. When expressed in two dimensionswith the large mass at r
0¼0, it can be written as
gs¼Kc2
0dt2/C0dx2þdy2
K; (1)
where K¼r0/C0rs ðÞ =r0is a function of the distance r0from
the central singularity of mass M,rs¼2GM =c2is the
Schwarzschild radius, and c0,dx,dy;anddtdenote wave
velocity, space, and time intervals. To deal with the classic
time, an overall factor that leaves the wave physics and theray trajectories unchanged is applied; it is the so-called con-
formal transformation,
g
c¼gs
Kc2
0¼dt2/C0dx2þdy2
K2c2
0: (2)
This conformed metric can be advantageously described by a
new distance variable, r¼r0/C0rsoutside the Schwarzschild
Fig. 2. Top row: three snapshots from the movie recorded at 2800 Hz just after the impact at t¼0 ms. The front of the plane wave is visible as the shadow that
propagates across the entire membrane. Bottom row: corresponding horizontal particle velocity color (online only) maps, as extracted from pairs of consecutive
frames using phase-tracking algorithms. Multimedia View: https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006612.1
Fig. 1. An elastic fabric membrane (using a cotton sweater) is stretched over
a drum pad. A wooden ruler carefully positioned along the ﬁbers is then
given a strong tap in the middle using a drumstick, which creates a plane
wave (stars). The gravity well M in the circled region is a warped depression
created by pulling a single ﬁber of the sweater downward (perpendicular to
the membrane) by 2 cm. The observation point E stands for an observer on
Earth. Inset: magniﬁcation of the fabric gravity well.
48 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Catheline et al. 48 04 October 2023 22:59:54
radius, such that the space coefﬁcient K¼r=rþrsðÞ :This
space coefﬁcient is represented in the inset of Fig. 3(b), and
it allows the membrane curvature of 2D ﬁnite difference sim-ulation of the wave equation to be handled.
The Taylor expansion of the Laplace operator applied to a
scalar ﬁeld /in a curved manifold becomes
D//C25K2
dr2/xþdr;yþ/x/C0dr;yþ/x;yþdrþ/x;y/C0dr/C04/x;y/C0/C1:
(3)
Far from mass M, the space coefﬁcient Kis close to unity,
and Eq. (3)describes the standard Laplace operator widely
used for classic wave simulation in optics or acoustics. Insuch a ﬂat Galilean space described by (x, y) coordinates,waves follow straight lines. Closer to mass M, the space
coefﬁcient Kapproaches zero, which changes the metric and
is responsible for ray bending. The resulting ﬁnite difference
wave simulation, based on Eq. (3), yields the snapshot shown
in Fig. 3(b). This snapshot is extracted from the particle
velocity movie included in the supplementary material.
8The
simulation parameters are chosen to be as close as possibleto the experimental values: wave speed c
0¼7m s/C01, space
increment dr¼0:3 mm, time increment dt¼10/C05s, and
central wave frequency f0¼700 Hz measured by taking the
Fourier transform of the experimental displacement ﬁeld.The Schwarzschild distance was adjusted to ﬁt the experi-ments, r
s¼0:3 mm. It is worth noticing that this value is
comparable to the resolution, so the whole experiment lies
outside the event horizon. Also, Eqs. (1)and(2)describe a
linear and isotropic elastic membrane only in ﬁrst approxi-mation (see Sec. IVbelow). Exact classical analogs of wave
propagation near a black hole have been reported using waterwaves.
9–11
Figure 3(b) shows the simulated interaction between the
wave and the gravity well at time t¼7:1 ms. The region of
strong curvature (dotted circle) is commensurate with the 2-cm depth of the warped depression in the experiment. Insidethis region, the simulated wavefront faithfully reproduces thecircumﬂex shape observed for the experimental wavefront.
Black arrows perpendicular to the wave front are superim-
posed on the ﬁgure. They represent ray paths that correspondto the geodesic interpretation of Fig. 3(a). Good agreement
between the experiment and simulation conﬁrms thegeometric nature of the wave deviation from the straight
line: the nonlinear wave effects due to stretching in the
experiment are second-order effects and can be ignored.
There is a deep connection between the behavior of light
around a massive object and the behavior of membrane
waves around a locally warped depression. The mathemati-
cal bridge between a four-dimensional manifold and astretched membrane is the conformal transformation: from a
classical wave point of view, the Schwarzschild metric
around a mass point is expressed in Eq. (3)as a region of
simple speed variation governed by the space coefﬁcient
K.
12This proﬁle happens to be close to the shape of the
locally warped depression of a membrane. This explains
why the path taken by a rolling ball on a warped membrane
can resemble a celestial orbit, and also, why the path takenby a mechanical wave on a warped membrane can resemble
light deviation through a gravitational lens.
IV. DISCUSSION
We can revisit the famous 1919 Eddington experiment,
and study other gravitational lens effects, by interpreting the
fabric membrane wave experiment. Figure 4shows a particle
velocity map at time t¼8.9 ms, just after the interaction of
the wave with the gravity well M. Far from M (i.e., the Sun),the wave remains roughly planar. (Observed deviations may
be due to the difﬁculty in initially obtaining a perfectly
homogeneous stretched membrane.) So for light emitted bystars, rays that do not pass close to Mfollow straight lines.
For rays that pass close to the gravity well, the experimen-
tal angular deviation of membrane waves shows the same
trend as the simulation (inset, Fig. 4). These deviations,
which would be absent in a two-dimensional ﬂat membrane,
are thus nicely explained by the curvature of the membraneinto the third dimension and its topological effect on wave
propagation. Analogously, light rays that pass near the
region of a gravity well appear at an angle Dhrelative to the
expected direction, as shown by the empty stars in Fig. 4(a).
The Eddington experiment, thus, showed that space near theSun is not a 3D Newtonian ﬂat space, but a 4D curved space-
time manifold, as predicted by general relativity.
In the fabric membrane wave experiment of Fig. 4, one
can see two symmetric wavefronts emerging from the two
sides of the gravity well. Likewise, astronomers can see two
(or more) images of a star, a phenomenon known as the
Fig. 3. (a) Representation of a gravity well encountered by photons. The closer to the center, the more curved the geodesic (white lines). (b) Finite di fference
simulation for a plane scalar wave that propagates through the gravity well at t¼7.1 ms. Black arrows (as in Fig. 2) describe a simple geodesic interpretation
of the wavefront shaped by the geometry. Inset: the space coefﬁcient K near the gravity well center. https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006612.2
49 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Catheline et al. 49 04 October 2023 22:59:54
Einstein cross13or the Einstein–Cholson ring.14All of these
observations, including the Eddington experiment, are conse-quences of gravitational lensing.
Although they share some properties, the topology of 3D
warped membranes is not the topology of 4D curved space-time. The conformal transformation of the Schwarzschildmetric [Eq. (2)] is just an approximation of a real gravity
well, valid far from the Schwarzschild radius r
s. Even
there, Newton’s equations are imperfectly represented bythe experimentally observed motion of spheres rollingon curved fabric membranes.
6From a wave point of
view, some additional differences are worth pointing out.First, a fast longitudinal wave that is barely visible in theseexperiments propagates within the fabric membrane.Consequently, ﬁnite difference simulation of the scalar waveshould be replaced by a more realistic elastic wave model infuture studies. Second, since the membrane wave propagatesas a fabric strain wave, its nature might be closer to a gravi-tational wave than to the light waves of the Eddingtonexperiment.V. CONCLUSION
It is our hope that the experiment described here will pro-
vide new insight for the testing of geometry effects ofpseudo-mass on membrane wave propagation. Also, inspiredby acoustic metamaterials, we hope to use an elementaryfabric membrane mesh with simple geometry to study itstopological properties from a wave point of view.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to Romane, Marius, and Ade `le
Catheline for their help with the experiment.
a)Electronic mail: stefan.catheline@inserm.fr
1A. Einstein, “The ﬁeld equations of gravitation,” Prussian Acad. Sci.
844–847 (1915).
2F. W. Dyson, A. S. Eddington, and C. Davidson, “A determination of thedeﬂection of light by the Sun’s gravitational ﬁeld from observations madeat the total eclipse of May 29, 1919,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser.
A220(571–581), 291–333 (1920).
3D. Walsh, R. F. Carswell, and R. J. Weymann, “0957 þ561 A, B: Twin
quasistellar objects or gravitational lens?,” Nature 279, 381–384 (1979).
4U. Leonhardt and T. G. Philbin, “Transformation optics and the geometry
of light,” Prog. Opt. 53, 69–152 (2009).
5G. D. White and M. Walker, “The shape of ‘the Spandex’ and orbits upon
its surface,” Am. J. Phys. 70, 48–52 (2002).
6C. A. Middleton and M. Langston, “Elliptical-like orbits on a warped
spandex fabric: A theoretical/experimental undergraduate research proj-
ect,” Am. J. Phys. 84, 284–292 (2016).
7J. Boulanger, N. Le Bihan, S. Catheline, and V. Rossetto, “Non-adiabatic
geometric phase of elastic waves,” Ann. Phys. 327(3), 952–958 (2012).
8See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/10.0006612 for Fig. S1: membrane wave shaping in a sweater,
pantyhose, and swim suit; Movie 1: experimental membrane wave movie;and Movie 2: wave simulation across a gravity well.
9S. Weinfurtner, E. W. Tedford, M. C. J. Penrice, W. G. Unruh, and G. A.Lawrence, “Measurement of stimulated Hawking emission in an analogue
system,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 021302 (2011).
10L.-P. Euv /C19e, F. Michel, R. Parentani, T. G.Philbin, and G. Rousseaux,
“Observation of noise correlated by the Hawking effect in a water tank
G,”Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 121301 (2016).
11L.-P. Euv /C19e, S. Robertson, N. James, A. Fabbri, and G. Rousseaux,
“Scattering of co-current surface waves on an analogue black hole,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 124, 141101 (2020).
12J. Zhu, Y. Liu, Z. Liang, T. Chen, and J. Li, “Elastic waves in curved
space: Mimicking a wormhole,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 234301 (2018).
13J. Huchra, M. Gorenstein, S. Kent, I. Shapiro, G. Smith, E. Horine, and R.
Perley, “2237 þ0305: A new and unusual gravitational lens,” Astron. J.
90, 691–696 (1985).
14J. Hewitt, E. L. Turner, D. P. Schneider, B. F. Burke, G. I. Langston, and
C. R. Lawrence, “Unusual radio source MG1131 þ0456: A possible
Einstein ring,” Nature 333, 537–540 (1988).
Fig. 4. Particle velocity map at time t¼8.9 ms after the impact. Stars sym-
bolize the initial front of the plane wave. The telescope orientations perpen-
dicular to the wave front represent the direction of light propagation (i.e.,
from the stars). From the observation point E (i.e., the Earth), positioned
directly behind the gravity well M, the angular deviation of the star’s image
is shown. Note that images are formed for two possible orientations of the
telescope. Top panel: experimental angular deviation Dhfor a two-
dimensional ﬂat membrane of pantyhose, sweater, and swimsuit are com-pared to the simulation (dashed line).
50 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 Catheline et al. 50 04 October 2023 22:59:54
