
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkAUGUST 01 2023
Helping students apply superposition principle in problems
involving spherical, cylindrical, and planar charge
distributions 
Jing Li ; Alexandru Maries ; Chandralekha Singh
Am. J. Phys.  91, 613–616 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0127127
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Voltage is the Most Dif ficult Subject for Students in Physics by Inquiry's Electric Circuits Module
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2007)
Electric field lines: The implications of students' interpretation on their understanding of the concept of
electric field and of the superposition principle
Am. J. Phys.  (August 2019)
Improving Student Understanding of Coulomb’ s Law and Gauss’ s Law
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2007) 04 October 2023 22:54:50
Helping students apply superposition principle in problems involving
spherical, cylindrical, and planar charge distributions
Jing Li
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260
Alexandru Mariesa)
Department of Physics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45221
Chandralekha Singhb)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15260
(Received 19 September 2022; accepted 2 June 2023)
We describe student difﬁculties in applying the superposition principle in combination with
Gauss’s law. We addressed these difﬁculties by developing a tutorial that uses guided inquiry.
Students who used this tutorial following lecture-based instruction performed signiﬁcantly better
on these topics than those who did not. Instructors can assign the tutorial as classwork orhomework.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0127127
I. INTRODUCTION
Gauss’s law is very challenging for students and using it
in combination with the superposition principle only adds
further layers of complexity. Understanding Gauss’s lawrequires understanding of the concepts of both electric ﬁeldand electric ﬂux, and prior work has uncovered some of thecommon difﬁculties students have with these concepts. Forexample, Li and Singh
1investigated student difﬁculties with
the electric ﬁeld and the superposition principle and used
these difﬁculties as resources for developing a tutorial toaddress these difﬁculties. The difﬁculties described includeconfusing electric ﬁeld and electric force, thinking that onlythe nearest point charge contributes to the electric ﬁeld at aspeciﬁc point, confusion due to the electric ﬁeld line repre-
sentation and interpretation of how to use it, and others.
Campos et al.
2investigated the difﬁculty involved in use-
fully interpreting the electric ﬁeld line representation to rea-son about the electric ﬁeld due to multiple charges andinferred from their ﬁndings that the use of this kind of repre-sentation may actually be detrimental with regard to helping
students develop a functional understanding of the concept
of electric ﬁeld. The student difﬁculty associated with think-ing that only the nearest charge contributes to the electricﬁeld at a speciﬁc point can also be found in a study by Garzaand Zavala.
3They found, for example, that many students
thought that a charged vertical bar would “cancel” the elec-
tric ﬁeld created by the point charge on its other side.
Student difﬁculties with the electric ﬁeld and superpositionprinciple have also been described in the context of continu-ous charge distributions
4and were addressed in a tutorial.
Student difﬁculties with electric ﬂux and Gauss’s law (andsymmetry) have also been investigated
5–8and used to
develop both a 25-item multiple choice test on these con-
cepts6as well as a tutorial to address the common student
difﬁculties.7Other investigation shows that Gauss’s law is so
challenging that students in an upper-level electricity andmagnetism course often continue to struggle with using it toreason about the electric ﬁeld caused by continuous charge
distributions.
8
Here, we describe student difﬁculties and how they were
used as a guide for the development and evaluation of atutorial to help students learn to apply the superposition prin-
ciple in problem contexts involving spherical, cylindrical,and planar charge distributions. The types of problems stu-dents were asked to solve using the superposition principleto ﬁnd the net electric ﬁeld involved complex situations such
as “two adjacent spheres with charge uniformly distributed
over their surfaces” or “an inﬁnite cylinder with uniform sur-face charge adjacent to a point charge.” Students struggledwith these problems in which Gauss’s law is not useful toﬁnd the electric ﬁeld due to the entire charge distribution in“one go.”
In Secs. II–IV , we describe student difﬁculties identiﬁed
in calculus-based introductory physics and how the tutorialwas designed to address them, followed by implementationresults (comparing tutorial and comparison groups) and sug-gestions for how the tutorial could be incorporated in teach-ing. Details related to development, validation, and
implementation of the tutorial can be found in Ref. 1and the
supplementary material
9(which also includes the entire tuto-
rial, pre-test, and post-test). Analysis of these difﬁcultiesincludes more than 100 pre-tests and more than 250 post-tests, in addition to individual interviews with a subset ofstudents using a think-aloud protocol about these topics. Theinterviews were conducted to better understand student difﬁ-culties and inform the development of the tutorial, pre-test,and post-test. The analysis of the pre-test and post-test datais part of a systematic study on student difﬁculties with theseconcepts and approaches to mitigate them.
II. STUDENT DIFFICULTIES AND HOW THE
TUTORIAL ADDRESSED THEM
Before we discuss the common difﬁculties identiﬁed, we
note that while the difﬁculties experienced by all students
were similar in nature, students in the sections of the class in
which the tutorial was used (tutorial sections) were lesslikely to have difﬁculties compared to students in the sec-tions that did not use the tutorial (comparison group). In ourdiscussion of these student difﬁculties, we will refer to spe-ciﬁc questions from the pre-test and post-test and speciﬁcsections of the tutorial administered to students, all of whichare provided in the supplementary material.
9
613 Am. J. Phys. 91(8), August 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 613 04 October 2023 22:54:50
Many students had great difﬁculty applying both Gauss’s
law and the principle of superposition to calculate the vector
sum of the electric ﬁelds when Gauss’s law can be used to
ﬁnd the electric ﬁeld due to part of the charge distribution.
This is despite the fact that on both the pre-test and the post-
test, students were given the results from applying Gauss’slaw to calculate the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld due to a
uniformly charged sphere, line, or plane. Here, we give
examples of the common student difﬁculties in correctlyapplying the superposition principle in the contexts of the
problems posed and how the tutorial addressed them.
Trying to apply Gauss’s law for multiple objects instead
of using the results from Gauss’s law separately for each
and using the superposition principle: Fig. 1shows the
geometry used in two of the pre-test questions:
9a thin line of
charge parallel to a hollow non-conducting cylinder, both
uniformly charged, inﬁnite in extent and with the same
charge per unit length. Students are asked to ﬁnd the direc-
tion and magnitude of the net electric ﬁeld at points A and B.
Students can ﬁrst ﬁnd the electric ﬁeld at points A and B dueto the line charge and cylinder of charge separately. Then,
by using the superposition principle, one can ﬁnd the net
electric ﬁeld at each of those points. After traditional instruc-
tion, on this pre-test question, about 35% of all students
found the direction of the electric ﬁeld at point A correctlywhile only 14% of them obtained the correct direction of the
ﬁeld at point B. Some students were confused about the dif-
ference between the net electric ﬁeld and its components,correctly ﬁnding the component due to each object but
unable to combine them to ﬁnd the net ﬁeld, and interviews
suggested that in some cases it was because they were
attempting to apply Gauss’s law to the entire charge distribu-
tion. In other words, they did not see the relevance of theelectric ﬁeld components to ﬁnding the net electric ﬁeld
because they expected that Gauss’s law will give them the
net electric ﬁeld for the entire distribution. Similarly, on the
pre-test question (3),
9which described a situation with two
uniformly charged non-conducting spheres close to eachother, some students drew the ﬁeld vectors due to each indi-
vidual sphere, but did not draw the direction of the net elec-
tric ﬁeld.
To address these difﬁculties, the tutorial presents a situa-
tion with two adjacent hollow non-conducting spheres that
both carry charges þQ. Students are asked to ﬁnd the magni-
tude of the electric ﬁeld at four points, three of which are
outside either of the spheres. They are guided to understandthat one should use the results from Gauss’s law to ﬁnd the
electric ﬁeld separately due to each sphere at the indicated
points and then add the two vectorially. Students are then
asked to apply this idea to various situations, helping solidify
these concepts.9The tutorial also includes dialog between
two hypothetical students who discuss the ﬁeld inside an inﬁ-nite non-conducting uniformly charged hollow cylinder with
a point charge located outside the cylinder. In this scenario,
one student insists that the electric ﬁeld is zero inside the cyl-inder because no charge is enclosed, while the other states
correctly that while the electric ﬁeld due to the inﬁnite cylin-
der is zero at that location, the electric ﬁeld due to the point
charge is non-zero, yielding a non-zero net ﬁeld.
9
Not considering direction when adding two electric ﬁeld
vectors: Another difﬁculty with the superposition principle
was assuming that the magnitude of the net ﬁeld is the sum
of the magnitudes of the ﬁeld due to various objects on
which charges were distributed. For example, on pre-test
question (2) which uses the situation shown in Fig. 1,9some
students simply added the magnitudes of the electric ﬁelddue to the inﬁnite non-conducting cylinder and the inﬁnite
line. One interviewed student who used this incorrect method
was asked explicitly if the electric ﬁeld is a vector. The stu-
dent responded that the electric ﬁeld is a vector but since he
was asked for the magnitude of the net electric ﬁeld, headded the magnitudes of the electric ﬁeld contributions com-
ing from the two charged objects. This difﬁculty might at
least in part be due to the fact that using Gauss’s law in addi-tion to superposition principle adds to students’ cognitive
load, and it illustrates the difﬁculty students have in transfer-
ring knowledge of vector addition from mechanics to elec-
trodynamics. It might also be that when using Gauss’s law
by itself (without superposition), students rarely use the vec-tor nature of the electric ﬁeld as explicitly as when they do it
while ﬁrst learning to use superposition. Thus, the tutorial
helps students recognize that adding electric ﬁelds requires
using vector addition in situations that require using both
Gauss’s law and superposition.
To address this difﬁculty, in the tutorial, students are
asked to calculate the magnitude of the net electric ﬁeld at a
point directly in the middle of two uniformly charged
spheres as well as at other points where the two electric
ﬁelds created by the spheres are neither parallel nor oppo-
site.
9Being asked about the net electric ﬁeld at a point
directly in the middle of the two spheres is intended to elicit
student reasoning about direction because at that point, the
Fig. 1. Diagram provided for question (1) on the pre-test (Ref. 9).
614 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 8, August 2023 Li, Maries, and Singh 614 04 October 2023 22:54:50
net electric ﬁeld is zero (due to the directions being opposite)
and students generally recognize this. Additionally, there areother situations in the tutorial in which the vector nature ofthe electric ﬁeld is necessary to consider.
Electric ﬁeld for multiple parallel inﬁnite sheets with
uniform charge is necessarily zero “outside” the sheets:Post-test questions (4) and (5)
9describe three inﬁnite parallel
sheets with uniform surface charge densities of þr,/C0r,þr.
The negative sheet is halfway between the two positivesheets. Here, the most common mistake, especially in thecomparison group, was assuming that the electric ﬁeld iszero at a point outside of the arrangement. For example, oneinterviewed student made a generalization from the case of aparallel plate capacitor to claim that the ﬁeld at that point iszero. This type of difﬁculty could also be related to an inap-propriate generalization of what students learn about conduc-
tors. When asked explicitly to show why the ﬁeld is zero
using the superposition principle, the student was uncomfort-able using this principle and stated that he did not know howto show that the net ﬁeld is zero but he remembered fromclass that the net ﬁeld should be zero outside the parallelplates. The tutorial addresses these types of difﬁculties witha scenario involving two parallel inﬁnite sheets with uniformcharge.
9
Apart from these difﬁculties with the superposition princi-
ple, below we categorize some common conceptual issueswith ﬁnding the net electric ﬁeld.
Measuring distances from the surface of a uniformly
charged sphere or cylinder to ﬁnd the ﬁeld: At the begin-
ning of the pre-test and post-test, students were explicitlygiven the magnitude of the electric ﬁeld due to a sphere ofcharge at a distance rfrom its center. However, some stu-
dents appear not to have taken note of this instruction care-fully. One common difﬁculty was taking ras the distance
measured from the surface. Students had similar difﬁcultieswith charged cylinders. During interviews, even though stu-dents were told that the inﬁnite line and the inﬁnite cylinderin Fig. 1have the same charge per unit length, many still
claimed that the cylinder would have more effect at point Bbecause one side of the cylinder is closer to the point wherethe electric ﬁeld is being calculated.
This difﬁculty was addressed in multiple contexts in the
tutorial by asking students questions in which knowing thatthe distances should be measured from the center of thesphere/cylinder was necessary. For example, the tutorial had aquestion very similar to question (1) on the pre-test (Fig. 1).
Students had to ﬁnd the net electric ﬁeld due to a point chargeand an inﬁnitely long cylinder where they needed to measurethe distance from the center of the cylinder.
9The tutorial also
included a discussion between two hypothetical students in
which one voices the common difﬁculty (measure the dis-tance from the surface) and the other voices the correctapproach.
9Also, in the tutorial scenario with two spheres
described earlier, students have to evaluate the validity ofhypothetical student conversations focusing on these issues.9
Claiming that a non-conductor shields the inside from
the electric ﬁeld due to external charges: For example, on
pre-test question (1),9some students claimed that the inﬁnite
line with uniform charge in Fig. 1cannot produce a ﬁeld at
point A inside the inﬁnite non-conducting hollow cylinderbecause point A is inside the cylinder and is shielded fromcharges outside. Another example comes from question (3)on the pre-test
9which described a situation in which two hol-
low non-conducting spheres with uniform chargedistributions on the surface are near each other. When asked
to determine the net electric ﬁeld at points inside of one ofthe spheres (not at the middle), some students claimed that
the ﬁeld is zero everywhere inside the sphere and argued that
the second sphere cannot produce a ﬁeld inside the ﬁrstsphere because of shielding. This notion of shielding wasretained by the students despite being reminded during theinterviews that the object on which the charges are distrib-
uted is non-conducting and there are also charges outside in
the problem posed. For example, on post-test question (1),
9
in which a hollow, non-conducting, uniformly chargedsphere is near a point charge and asks students to draw vec-tors showing the electric ﬁeld at a point inside the sphere,
some students said the electric ﬁeld inside the sphere is zero.
When during interviews, they were explicitly asked by theinterviewer why the point charge near the charged spheredoes not produce a ﬁeld inside the hollow sphere, some stu-
dents referred to the shielding of the inside of the sphere
from the charges on the sphere and the charges outside of thesphere. Some students noted that they could not explainexactly why the non-conducting sphere will produce shield-ing, but that they remembered that the electric ﬁeld must
somehow cancel out in the hollow region for all shapes and
charge distributions. Further prodding suggested that due toa lack of thorough understanding, these students were oftenovergeneralizing or confusing two different facts: The sym-metry argument that shows (using Gauss’s law) that the elec-
tric ﬁeld for a sphere with a uniform surface charge is zero
everywhere inside regardless of whether the sphere is con-ducting or non-conducting, and/or the fact that the electricﬁeld inside a conductor in equilibrium is always zero regard-less of the shape of the conductor.
This difﬁculty is also addressed in multiple contexts in the
tutorial. For example, students are asked to calculate the
electric ﬁeld in a situation similar to the one shown in Fig. 1
(at point A).
9Another example of addressing this difﬁculty
is asking students to contemplate a discussion between twostudents in which one insists that the electric ﬁeld is zero
inside of the cylinder (for a situation similar to the one
described in Fig. 1at point A) while the other correctly states
that the charge distribution on the cylinder does not create anelectric ﬁeld inside of the cylinder, but the outside pointcharge does.
9Additionally, students have to use this concept
both for this situation and another similar one (two hollow
non-conducting spheres near each other) to ﬁnd the magni-tude of the ﬁeld inside one of them.9
III. PERFORMANCE OF THE TUTORIAL
AND COMPARISON GROUPS
The tutorial along with the pre-test and post-test are
provided in the supplementary material.9The pre-test and
post-test results show that the tutorial was effective in help-ing students apply the superposition principle correctly inthese contexts. They are described in detail in the supple-mentary material.
9Students in the comparison group showed
a slight improvement from 24% on the pre-test to 35% on
the post-test on average, whereas for the tutorial group, stu-dents improved from an average of 27% to 81%.
IV. IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
We used the research on student difﬁculties as a guide to
develop and evaluate a tutorial to help students learn to apply
615 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 8, August 2023 Li, Maries, and Singh 615 04 October 2023 22:54:50
Gauss’s law along with the superposition principle correctly.
Results suggest that the tutorial is effective at helping stu-dents apply the superposition principle in these contexts.
The tutorial can be used in many ways in its entirety or in
part as follows:
•The tutorial could be used in part or in full either in classor in recitation. We note that the tutorial is designed to beused by the instructors as a supplement, not as the ﬁrsttool to introduce students to these concepts. When stu-
dents work in small groups on the tutorial, the instructor
or the teaching assistant can move around to ensure thatstudents engage productively with each other and makesense of the guided inquiry-based sequences. Also, partsof the tutorial could be used if there isn’t enough time for
students to work all the problems. For example, the tuto-
rial discusses three different situations with uniform sur-face charge distribution: two spheres, a cylinder and pointcharge, two large sheets. One can select any of these three
scenarios and have students work on it before having a
related class discussion.
•After students learn about Gauss’s law, questions in thetutorial could be framed into think-pair-share or clickerquestions. These two approaches are similar except think-pair-share does not require feedback via clickers and ques-
tions using think-pair-share may or may not be framed in
a multiple-choice format. However, even in the think-pair-share format, students can be asked to share what they dis-cussed with their peers followed by a full class discussion.
For example, the tutorial involves a situation in which
there is an inﬁnitely long uniformly charged non-conducting hollow cylinder close to a point charge.Students could be presented with just the non-conductingcylinder ﬁrst and asked about the electric ﬁeld inside the
cylinder (zero) possibly with several options to select
from. Then, the point charge could be added to the situa-tion and students could be asked a similar question againfor both objects together. Similarly, students could be
asked about the ﬁeld outside a cylinder or a sphere in
order to help them measure distance correctly before add-ing a second charged object. This approach helps gradu-ally add complexity and could help manage students’
cognitive load. The support can be gradually reduced for
other tutorial questions and students can be asked directlyabout the electric ﬁeld due to objects together to helpthem develop self-reliance.
•The tutorial includes multiple conversations betweenhypothetical students in which one student voices a com-
mon difﬁculty and the other provides a correct explanation
or other conversations in which they both provide parts ofa correct explanation. These conversations can also beused in class as think-pair-share or clicker questions ask-
ing students about which hypothetical student they would
agree with, e.g., student 1, student 2, neither, or both. Thiscan be followed by class discussion about the underlying
concepts.
•The tutorial can alternatively be assigned as homeworkafter students have had prior instruction in relevant con-cepts. When assigned as homework, after students submitit as homework, the tutorial problems can be discussedbrieﬂy in class.
Thus, the tutorial is designed to allow instructors ﬂexibility
in using their preferred methods for initial instruction, rangingfrom traditional lectures to assigned reading followed by stu-dent questions and in-class discussion. If only part of the tuto-rial is used by instructors, they could select the pre-test andpost-test questions that correspond to the material in those
sections. In this manner, instructors can use either the full or
part of the tutorial based upon their preference as a resourceinside or outside of the classroom to actively engage studentsin learning these challenging concepts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Z. Isvan for help in
tabulating data and F. Reif, P. Reilly, and R. P. Devaty forhelpful discussions. The authors also thank the faculty andstudents who helped with this study.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
a)ORCID: 0000-0001-5781-7343.
b)ORCID: 0000-0002-1234-5458.
1J. Li and C. Singh, “Investigating and improving introductory physics stu-
dents’ understanding of the electric ﬁeld and superposition principle,” Eur.
J. Phys. 38, 055702 (2017).
2E. Campos, G. Zavala, K. Zuza, and J. Guisasola, “Electric ﬁeld lines: The
implications of students’ interpretation on their understanding of the con-cept of electric ﬁeld and of the superposition principle,” Am. J. Phys. 87,
660–667 (2019).
3A. Garza and G. Zavala, “Contrasting students’ understanding of electricﬁeld and electric force,” AIP Conf. Proc. 1513 , 142–145 (2013).
4J. Li and C. Singh, “Investigating and improving introductory physics stu-
dents’ understanding of electric ﬁeld and the superposition principle: The
case of a continuous charge distribution,” Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 15,
010116 (2019).
5J. Li and C. Singh, “Investigating and improving introductory physics stu-dents’ understanding of electric ﬂux,” Eur. J. Phys. 39, 045711 (2018).
6C. Singh, “Student understanding of symmetry and Gauss’s law of elec-
tricity,” Am. J. Phys 74(10), 923–936 (2006).
7J. Li and C. Singh, “Investigating and improving introductory physics stu-
dents’ understanding of symmetry and Gauss’s law,” Eur. J. Phys. 39,
015702 (2017).
8R. E. Pepper, S. V. Chasteen, S. J. Pollock, and K. E. Perkins, “Our bestjuniors still struggle with Gauss’s law: Characterizing their difﬁculties,”
AIP Conf. Proc. 1289 , 245–248 (2010).
9See supplementary material online for the pre-test, post-test, and tutorial.
616 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 8, August 2023 Li, Maries, and Singh 616 04 October 2023 22:54:50
