
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| APRIL 01 2022
How physics textbooks embed meaning in the equals sign 

Dina Zohrabi Alaee ; Eleanor C. Sayre ; Kellianne Kornick ; Scott V . Franklin
Am. J. Phys.  90, 273–278 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009096
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Designing EMB-based Mealy FSM with transformation of collections of output functions
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2015)
Mechanical approach to surface tension and capillary phenomena
Am. J. Phys.  (March 2021)
Shape oscillation and stability of an encapsulated microbubble translating in an acoustic wave
J. Acoust. Soc. Am.  (October 2018) 04 October 2023 23:06:33
How physics textbooks embed meaning in the equals sign
Dina Zohrabi Alaee
School of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York 14623-5603
Eleanor C. Sayrea)
School of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York 14623-5603
and Department of Physics, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506
Kellianne Kornick and Scott V. Franklin
School of Physics and Astronomy, Rochester Institute of Technology, Rochester, New York 14623-5603
(Received 17 May 2021; accepted 2 December 2021)
Physics as a discipline embeds conceptual meaning about the physical world in mathematical
formalism. The meaning associated with mathematical symbols depends on context, and physicistscan shift conceptual meaning by manipulating those symbols. We present an analysis of the
different physical meanings associated with the equals sign “ ¼” that can be inferred from
introductory and upper-level physics textbooks. Five distinct meanings/categories are identiﬁed:causality, balancing, deﬁnitional, assignment, and calculation, each with operational deﬁnitions
that help identify their presence. The different uses can be seen to link mathematical equations to
intuitive conceptual ideas, and signiﬁcant differences in the frequency with which these are usedexist between textbooks of different levels.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009096
I. INTRODUCTION
Mathematics is the language of physics. Taking up this
metaphor, in this study, we examine “grammar” on a minutelevel (cf. Ref. 1with Ref. 2) to investigate the particular
manner, in which the equals sign is used in physics textbooks
across the undergraduate curriculum. The concept of mathe-matical equality is surprisingly complex, and several studieshave documented that students often misinterpret the equalssign as an operational, not relational, symbol.
3–8
We seek a record of how equals signs are used across
physics programs. For U.S. physics university curricula, this
means focusing on textbooks, which we believe represent
some amount of disciplinary consensus. We look at ﬁvephysics textbooks to investigate the language that authors
use in a physics context. Focusing attention on the structure
of the equations involving the equals sign leads to an under-
standing of an equation’s underlying meaning, which can
then help illuminate the dialect of mathematics used inphysics.
There is a long history of mathematics education research,
mostly in K–12 contexts, into students’ understanding of
mathematical symbols, in general, and equality, in particular
(e.g., Refs. 9–11 ). In one of the earliest studies, Behr et al.
9
observed that elementary school children “consider the sym-
bol¼as a ‘do something signal’ that ‘gives the answer’ on
the right-hand side. There is a strong tendency among all thechildren to view the ¼symbol as being acceptable when one
(or more) operation signs precede it.”
Falkner et al.
12identiﬁed that kindergarten students under-
stood the concept of equality but struggled to transfer that
understanding to algebraic problems, often interpreting the
equals sign as indicating action (a “do it” sign). Knuth et al.3
linked middle school students’ understanding of the equals
sign with their ability to solve problems involving algebraic
equations. These and other contemporaneous studies focus
on the mathematically appropriate abstractions of equality,
using physical systems primarily as examples andillustrations. Other studies conﬁrm that students across K–12
see the equals sign as primarily an operational symboland do not have a deeper understanding of mathematicalequivalence.
3,11,13Kieran11found that the idea of the equals
sign as an operator is formed before formal education begins
and continues throughout high school. As instructors, wehave seen students in university physics classes use it as a doit symbol as well, sometimes writing lines of math that
include multiple equal signs, mirroring sequential keys they
would type on a calculator. In these long lines of mathemat-ics, the left side of the ﬁrst equal sign may or may not beequal to the right side of the last equal sign, because a hall-
mark of do it is to connect individual pieces of mathematical
procedures in order from left to right, not to build a mathe-matical sentence, which can be read in either direction. Thisview encourages students to see formulas as knowledge to bememorized and prevents a recognition of the underlying
meaning and structure.
Most physics education research on direct problem solving
(as opposed to, say, broader sense-making) has focusedeither on students’ conceptual understanding or on engage-ment with mathematical processing, rarely connecting the
two. In a review of over a decade of published articles on
problem solving from nine leading physics and science edu-cation journals, Kuo et al.
14found “no studies that focused
upon the mathematical processing step or described alterna-
tives to using equations as computational tools.” This is
despite the general recognition that the interpretationof mathematical symbols is a skill necessary to developstudents’ understanding of physics.
15–17Subsequently,
Uhden et al.18used the term “mathematization” in develop-
ing a model for how mathematics is used in physics educa-tion. To understand students’ mathematizing in physics, it isnecessary to identify how students represent concepts sym-
bolically, verify solutions, and connect both to the physical
world.
19–22
To understand “how students understand physics equa-
tions,” Sherin23,24proposed symbolic forms , cognitive
273 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 273 04 October 2023 23:06:33
primitives that associate physics conceptual meaning with
mathematical symbols. Tuminaro and Redish25subsequently
used symbolic forms to model how students translate mathe-
matical solutions into physical understanding, with Kuo
et al.14ﬁnding that students do not expect conceptual knowl-
edge of mathematics to connect to their problem solving. We
take up the idea of symbolic forms and focus on the concep-
tual meaning behind the equals sign. More broadly, we posit
that the equals sign does not happen in isolation; rather, it is
an element of mathematical sentences. The forms of equa-
tions are context-dependent, and equivalent mathematical
equations can have different symbolic forms. For example,the right-hand side of the kinematic equation v
f¼v0þat
can be interpreted as a “base þchange,” with the initial veloc-
ityv0modiﬁed by the change in velocity brought about by
acceleration. The topologically equivalent equation for net
force of a spring-gravity system Fnet¼/C0kx/C0mg, however,
is more likely to be interpreted as a “sum of parts,” with the
net force Fnetthe sum of the various forces, in this case,
gravity mgand spring kx.
This study extends previous work26and explores the con-
ceptual meaning behind mathematical formalisms. We ana-
lyze physics textbooks to investigate the disciplinary
interpretation of the equals sign. In doing so, we do not askhow the ¼understanding might be used to solve a problem,
but rather whether thematic categories arise when consider-
ing a physicist’s interpretation of the symbol. Our method
parallels to that of Burton and Morgan,27who studied pub-
lished journal articles in a variety of mathematical sub-ﬁelds
to identify a “natural language” in their epistemological
practice. We ﬁnd a shared focus in the work of Kress28in
striving to understand “what language [including, in our
case, math symbols] is doing and being made to do by peoplein speciﬁc situations in order to make particular meanings”
and agree with Burton and Morgan27that doing so may
“shed some light on the values and meanings of the
practices” of physicists in the pedagogical context.
II. TEXTBOOK SELECTION
Our study focuses on ﬁve textbooks (Table I) spanning
introductory through senior-level coursework in mechanics,
electrostatics, and quantum mechanics. Physics curricula are
often cyclical, and later courses often return to previously
covered material with more depth and mathematical sophisti-
cation. Because of this, we selected chapters with similar
content, allowing us to see differences across both topic and
level. Textbooks were chosen as representative of level and
traditional presentation of content; comparisons across simi-lar books revealed little differences in presentation. We omitmore research-based books (e.g., Workshop Physics, Physics
by Inquiry or Matter and Interactions) as their collective
market share is much smaller.
At the introductory level, we analyze Young’s University
Physics with Modern Physics (14th edition),29a popular
introductory physics textbook used at the authors’ local insti-
tutions and universities around the world. At the intermediate
level, we analyze Krane’s Modern Physics30and Taylor’s
Classical Mechanics .31At the upper division, we analyze
Grifﬁths’ Introduction to Electrodynamics32and
Introduction to Quantum Mechanics .33Speciﬁc topics/chap-
ters analyzed are listed in Table I.
Physics undergraduate textbooks, in general, are consis-
tent in content and presentation, suggesting that our results
should generalize to other physics textbooks. Furthermore,
the books chosen are very popular for their respective
courses and, as a result, reach a large fraction of US physics
students.
III. METHODOLOGY
The categorization scheme was developed through itera-
tive readings of the textbooks. After reading each chapter,
two researchers individually wrote down the key points they
noticed about the equations. After working through three
chapters, we created sets of notes that described each equa-tion observed, noting the conceptual meaning associated
with the equals sign in that equation. The ﬁrst draft of cate-
gories came from these data. The researchers then carefully
re-read each selected chapter to identify the category for
each equals sign. After coding all the equations individually,
results were discussed in a group of four researchers to reﬁne
the articulations. Equations with similar meanings were
grouped in order to develop robust descriptions of each of
category. After several iterative cycles of analysis and reﬁne-
ment, the coding scheme was judged stable and an outside
researcher used the coding scheme on random sections fromeach chapter to establish inter-rater reliability (IRR). 87.5%
of the outside researcher’s coding overlapped with the origi-
nal researchers; after clarifying discussions, including a tuto-
rial about the code book, subsequent IRR tests resulted in
100% agreement. An example of the coding applied to a
problem in the textbook is shown in Fig. 1, which shows a
problem as stated in the textbook with a worked solution,
including both equations and descriptive text.
IV. CATEGORIES
Five categories emerged from our study: deﬁnitional,
causal, assignment, balancing, and calculation. We
Table I. Textbook selection.
Textbook level Textbook and authors Chapters Description
Introductory University Physics with Modern Physics, 14th ed. Young &
Freedman21, 22 Charge, Gauss’s law, and electric ﬁeld
Intermediate Modern Physics, 2nd ed. Kenneth S. Krane 5 Time-independent Schr €odinger equation and harmonic oscillator
Classical Mechanics, 2005, John R. Taylor 4 Central-force problems, non-inertial frames, coupled oscillators,
and nonlinear mechanics
Upper-division Introduction to Electrodynamics, 4th ed. David J. Grifﬁths 2 Vector analysis, electrostatics, electric and magnetic ﬁelds, electr o-
dynamics, Coulomb’s Law, and Gauss’s Law
Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, 2nd ed. David J. Grifﬁths 2 Wave functions, time-independent Schr €odinger equation, particle
in a box, and the harmonic oscillator
274 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Alaee et al. 274 04 October 2023 23:06:33
emphasize that, in this study, every equals sign that
appears in the select chapter is assigned a code that indicates
its categorization ( ¼Dfor Deﬁnition, ¼Cfor Causal, ¼Afor
Assignment, ¼Bfor Balancing, or ¼Mfor Calculation). Table II
summarizes the ﬁve categories, including operational articu-lation, canonical form, and direction.A. Definitional (D)
As with most disciplines, physics uses careful deﬁnitions
to constrain ideas to narrow and speciﬁc uses. The equalssign mediates this deﬁnition in mathematical expressionsthrough an operational articulation “is always” or “is deﬁnedas.” For simplicity, we boldface vector quantities as appro-priate and only italicize scalar magnitudes. The equation
m¼
Fnet
a; (1)
therefore, deﬁnes the inertial mass mas the ratio of net force
to resulting acceleration. This deﬁnition is always true in thecontext of mechanics. A variation of the deﬁnition is used todeﬁne a mathematical formalism
dvx
dt¼lim
Dt!0Dvx
Dt: (2)
The order in which an equation is read is important.
Rittle-Johnson and Siegler34have found that elementary-
school children read all equations left-to-right, whereas
physicists read in speciﬁc directions depending on their con-textual use. Deﬁnitional equations are read left-to-right:“inertial mass is deﬁned as the ratio of net force to acceler-ation” and “the derivative is deﬁned as the limit….”
B. Causality (C)
Much of physics involves inferring causal relationships.
Forces cause (operationally “lead to” or “result in”) accelera-tions, and charged particles or currents cause electric or mag-netic ﬁelds, respectively. An example of an equation that
indicate causal relationships is
a¼
Fnet
m(3)
(forces cause accelerations).
In our discussions within the research team and with com-
munity members, the distinctions between causal anddeﬁni-
tional equals signs were dependent on context, moreso than
for any other two categories. Sometimes, different codeswere assigned to an equals sign in an equation, depending onthe other parts of the solution and context.
We emphasize that the context of each equation within a
larger problem or argument is important for determiningwhether to interpret the equals sign as deﬁnitional or causal.We use mechanistic explanations
35to help determine which
category applies within a speciﬁc context. For example, a
mechanistic story that describes the electric ﬁeld, Eis: (a)
electric ﬁelds are created by electric charges; (b) chargesexert a force on one another by means of disturbances inspace that they generate; (c) these disruptions are called elec-tric ﬁelds; and therefore, (d) the electric ﬁeld can be inferredby measuring the force on a point charge qat a given posi-
tion. The equals sign corresponding to Coulomb’s law F
¼qEin this story would be causal with charges and electric
ﬁelds causing the force. We note that the causal agents (here,
charges and electric ﬁeld) are often placed on the right side
of the equation and the resulting quantity (force) on the left
and read more naturally right-to-left. In contrast, a deﬁni-tional equals sign does not require such a descriptioneach time the equation is used and reads left-to-right.
Fig. 1. Visual depiction of coding of Example 2.3 from Introduction to
Electrodynamics .
Table II. Summary of categories identiﬁed in textbooks, including opera-
tional articulation used to identify type, example, and direction in which
equations containing this type of sign are most easily read.
Category Articulation Example Direction
Deﬁnitional “Is deﬁned as…” m¼F=a Left-to-right
Causality “Leads to” a¼F=m Right-to-left
Assignment “Let this ¼that” Y¼c=2m Left-to-right
Balancing “This is balanced by…” kx¼/C0mg Bidirectional
Calculate “The rest is just math…” 4 þ5¼9 Left-to-right
275 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Alaee et al. 275 04 October 2023 23:06:33
For example, a deﬁnitional context asserts that the electric
ﬁeld at the location of a test charge is deﬁned as the force F
divided by the charge q,E¼F=q.
C. Assignment (A)
Although deﬁnitional and causal equations represent foun-
dational physical relationships, it is sometimes necessary to
temporarily associate concepts or variables to each other.We label these temporary relations as assignments with anoperational articulation of “let this equal that.” In the sim-
plest cases, this form assigns numerical values to quantities
(e.g., t¼4) for use in solving problems or other manipula-
tions. A more complex form is seen with symbolicassignments
F
net¼kx/C0mg: (4)
Discussed earlier, this equation encapsulates the idea that the
net force on a mass hung from a spring is the sum of the
gravitational and elastic forces. The net force is not alwaysrepresented by this sum. Hence, this equation is not deﬁni-tional nor does the term kx/C0mg cause a net force. Rather
F
netand the sum kx/C0mgmay be used interchangeably for
immediately subsequent calculations.
A big difference between causal and assignment equal
signs is their intended scope. We sometimes use assignmentto deﬁne a new symbol and then later convert that assign-
ment into a causal relationship. For simple pendula, we
deﬁne the natural frequency as x¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
g=lp
, but in the metro-
nome problem, we ask how we can adjust the length to causethe desired frequency. Reimagining the same equation from
assignment to causality is sometimes difﬁcult, and students
might appear confused until this is pointed out explicitly.
D. Balancing (B)
Dynamic equilibrium is a physical concept in which two
(or more) quantities are in balance, numerically equivalent,and often directionally oppositional.
23When a mass hung
from a spring reaches equilibrium and the net force is zero,
an interpretation of the equality kx¼mgis that the force
from the spring kxisbalancing the gravitational force mg.
Another example of dynamic equilibrium and balance isfound in conservation equations, for example, Eq. (5), which
represents the balance between the ﬂux of a vector ﬁeld and
the time rate of change of an associated density ﬁeld
r/C1J¼/C0@q
@t: (5)
We note that our categorization of balancing, as with all
categories, is not an absolute property of an equation, but a
description of how a relation is thought of in the moment,
and so multiple interpretations exist simultaneously. For
example, Eq. (5)could be interpreted as an equality resulting
from an algebraic manipulation. The ultimate determination
lies not in the equation, but rather in the mind of the inter-
preter. The balancing category, thus, reﬂects interpretationsthat put one quantity “in balance” with another.
Unlike the previous categories, balancing equations may be
read in either direction, as the equation does not emphasize or
elevate one quantity over another. This directionality might be
evident in student thinking. For example, when doing energy
conservation problems, a balancing equals might be “changes in
energy for this object balance changes in energy for that object,”
which doesn’t require that one object be more “active” or“agentic” than the other. A causal equals, however, implies that
one object in the interaction is actively doing something to the
other, which receives it. A student who has a preferred direction-
ality to their equation (i.e., which object goes on the left or right
hand side) is probably using causality, not balancing.
E. Calculate (M)
The ﬁnal category identiﬁed is purely manipulative, indi-
cating the result of a calculation. It can be thought of as
equivalent to the use of a calculator button; a canonical
example is 4 þ5¼9.
V. RESULTS
1676 separate equals signs were coded in the ﬁve textbook
chapters studied, an average of 335 per chapter. The distribu-
tion of usage by category for each chapter is shown in Fig. 2.
In Fig. 2, textbooks are listed in order of increasing content
level from beginner (bottom) to most advanced (top). Allbars are normalized to 100% with numbers overlaid to indi-
cate the real numbers of codes in each category.
Fig. 2. Frequency of each equals sign category across ﬁve physics textbooks.
276 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Alaee et al. 276 04 October 2023 23:06:33
Introductory and intermediate textbooks (bottom three
rows) show a high proportion of assignment-type equals signswith (on average) 69% of all equals signs found to be of this
type. This is due to the presence of quantitative examples and
their formulaic, step-by-step solutions. Upper-level textbookshave a signiﬁcantly smaller (average 43%) portion of assign-ment equals signs and, surprisingly, twice the fraction (26%
vs 13%) of signs classiﬁed as calculation. We attribute this to
the presence of more complicated derivations, which involvemore symbolic manipulations. These derivations also oftenrely upon more carefully deﬁned quantities and so have a
larger fraction of deﬁnitional equals signs. Upper-level text-
books also have a surprising dearth of causal equals signs,even after we control for differences in content.
In addition to a shift in the frequency of the equals sign cat-
egories, there are also changes in the sub-type of assignment
equals sign as the material becomes more advanced.
Introductory textbooks have a roughly even distribution ofusage between symbolic and numeric assignments, a conse-quence of the many worked problems with numbers given.
Intermediate and advanced textbooks, however, use far greater
proportions of symbolic assignments. The intermediateMechanics textbook
31had a 10:1 ratio of symbolic-to-numeric
assignment equals signs, where the advanced Electricity &
Magnetism book32had a 22:1 ratio. Even when sample prob-
lems are present in these texts, the use of numbers is dis-counted in favor of more abstract, symbolic representations.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
A categorization scheme has been developed and vali-
dated internally and externally for consistency and plausibil-ity. Five categories are identiﬁed with symbolic and numericsub-categories also appearing. Our categorization schemesupplements Sherin’s symbolic forms.
23,24Whereas Sherin
ascribed meaning to entire equations, we argue that, at least
in some equations, the meaning is mediated by the type ofequals sign used. More broadly, we posit that the embeddedconceptual meaning is contained speciﬁcally in the mathe-
matical operators (symbols for addition, subtraction, multi-
plication, division, integration, differentiation, etc.) as thesedeﬁne relations between physics concepts. This meaningdepends on the quantities being related (e.g., F¼mahas a
different conceptual meaning than F¼mg), and the differ-
ence is expressed in the relation, i.e., the operationalsymbols.
We also ﬁnd that introductory textbooks use more opera-
tional (e.g., numerical assignment or calculation) types of
equals signs, while advanced textbooks incorporate a greater
proportion of symbolic assignments. Bridging between oper-ational and symbolic relational forms, therefore, maydevelop in students a better understanding of these nuanced
differences and enhance learning of upper-level content.
Advanced problems are also often more symbolic thannumeric, making an accurate perception about the relationalmeaning of the equals sign even more important.
We reiterate that our categorization scheme is one of
interpretation , describing how equations may be interpreted
and not representing any absolute quality of a particularequation. Nor is it intended to be exhaustive, and we antici-pate future work that expands the possible categories. The
value of this work lies in developing the language to under-
stand how students interpret equations with implications onhow teachers can respond effectively.Drawing direct applications to instruction from this study
would be premature. At most, we can urge instructors toattend to several aspects of the presentation of physics equa-
tions, including the language they use surrounding the equals
sign, how students discuss equality and equations, and howthese exist in relation to printed or other presentations. Avaluable next step in this research would involve connectingfundamental and applied research (e.g., curriculum develop-
ment) with an eye on instructional goals. We can speculate,
however, that framing the equals sign as a relational symbolwith different conceptual meanings might aid students inmaking connections between mathematics and physics withdistinctions between meanings becoming more important the
further students’ progress in their physics classes. Attending
to conceptual meanings of the equals sign might, therefore,help more advanced students develop and assume ways ofthinking like physicists.
We encourage instructors to provide opportunities such as
collaborative problem solving for students to foster their rea-
soning in the classroom and engage them in conversations
about the equals sign. As students discuss physics and math-ematics formalism, the collaborative nature of these problemsolving environments may help them pick up on and produc-tively use physics cultural meanings in mathematical
formalism.
Future work in this area could proceed along multiple
lines. First, instructor discourse surrounding use of symbolsduring classroom practice could be investigated. Such workwould identify how instructors attend to the conceptualmeanings of symbols with practical implications for instruc-
tion. Alternately, student articulations of meaning while
solving problems could yield insight into their conceptualunderstanding and physical models, analogous with recentwork on symbolic forms, (e.g., Ref. 14). Finally, physics
practitioner use (in, for example, research presentations)
could be analyzed, similar to the work of Burton and
Morgan
27to understand how articulations of concepts and
meaning are made in communications between experts. Sucharticulations could then be compared to the articulations pre-sented in instructional materials.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Kansas State
University Physics Education Research group (KSUPER) fortheir support and for helpful feedback. Three anonymousreviewers at ICLS gave us helpful feedback about an earlier
version of this paper. This work was begun as a joint
undergraduate research project for Kellianne Kornick andthesis research project for Dina Zohrabi-Alaee. The authorsalso thank Bahar Modir for their assistance with the IRR.This study was supported by the KSU Department of
Physics, NSF through Grant Nos. DUE-1430967 and DUE-
1317450 and the RIT Center for Advancing STEMTeaching, Learning, and Evaluation (CASTLE).
a)Electronic mail: esayre@gmail.com
1Moa Eriksson, Cedric J. Linder, and Urban Eriksson, “Towards under-
standing learning challenges involving sign conventions in introductory
level kinematics,” in Physics Education Research Conference 2018 (PER
Conference, Washington, DC, 2018).
2Nadaraj Govender, “Physics student teachers’ mix of understandings ofalgebraic sign convention in vector-kinematics: A phenomenographic
perspective,” Afr. J. Res. Math., Sci. Technol. Educ. 11(1), 61–73 (2007).
277 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Alaee et al. 277 04 October 2023 23:06:33
3Eric J. Knuth, Ana C. Stephens, Nicole M. McNeil, and Martha W.
Alibali, “Does understanding the equal sign matter? Evidence from solv-ing equations,” J. Res. Math. Educ. 36, 297–312 (2006).
4Marta Molina and Rebecca Ambrose, “Fostering relational thinking while
negotiating the meaning of the equals sign,” Teach. Child. Math. 13,
111–117 (2006).
5Eric J. Knuth, Martha W. Alibali, Shanta Hattikudur, Nicole M. McNeil,and Ana C. Stephens, “The importance of equal sign understanding in themiddle grades,” Math. Teach. Middle School 13, 514–519 (2008).
6B. Rittle-Johnson, Percival G. Matthews, Roger S. Taylor, and Katherine
L. McEldoon, “Assessing knowledge of mathematical equivalence: Aconstruct-modeling approach,” J. Educ. Psychol. 103(1), 85–104 (2011).
7Jody Sherman and Jeffrey Bisanz, “Equivalence in symbolic and nonsym-
bolic contexts: Beneﬁts of solving problems with manipulatives,” J. Educ.
Psychol. 101, 88–100 (2009).
8Ana C. Stephens, Eric J. Knuth, Maria L. Blanton, Isil Isler, Angela
Murphy Gardiner, and Tim Marum, “Equation structure and the meaning
of the equal sign: The impact of task selection in eliciting elementary stu-
dents’ understandings,” J. Math. Behav. 32, 173–182 (2013).
9Merlyn Behr, Stanley Erlwanger, and Eugene Nichols, How Children
View Equality Sentences, PMDC Technical Report No.3 (ERIC, Addison-
Wesley, Florida State University, 1976).
10Herbert Ginsburg, Children’s Arithmetic: The Learning Process (D. Van
Nostrand Co., New York, 1977).
11Carolyn Kieran, “Concepts associated with the equality symbol,” Educ.
Stud. Math. 12(3), 317–326 (1981).
12Karen P. Falkner, Linda Levi, and Thomas P. Carpenter, “Children’s
understanding of equality: A foundation for algebra,” Teach. Child. Math.
6, 232–237 (1999).
13Arthur J. Baroody and Herbert P. Ginsburg, “The effects of instruction on
children’s understanding of the “equals” sign,” Elem. School J. 84(2),
199–212 (1983).
14Eric Kuo, Michael M. Hull, Ayush Gupta, and Andrew Elby, “How stu-
dents blend conceptual and formal mathematical reasoning in solving
physics problems?,” Sci. Educ. 97(1), 32–57 (2013).
15William J. Leonard, Robert J. Dufresne, and Jose P. Mestre, “Using quali-
tative problem-solving strategies to highlight the role of conceptual knowl-edge in solving problems,” Am. J. Phys. 64(12), 1495–1503 (1996).
16E. Mazur, “Understanding or memorization: Are we teaching the right
thing?,” in Conference on the Introductory Physics Course (Wiley, New
York, 1997), p. 10.
17Edward F. Redish, “Problem solving and the use of math in physicscourses,” in World View on Physics Education in 2005 , Delhi, India, p. 10.18Olaf Uhden, Ricardo Karam, Maur /C19ıcio Pietrocola, and Gesche Pospiech,
“Modelling mathematical reasoning in physics education,” Sci. Educ.
21(4), 485–506 (2012).
19Hans Freudenthal, Mathematics as an Educational Task (Springer,
Dordrecht, 1973), p. 696.
20Adrian Treffers, Three Dimensions: A Model of Goal and Theory
Description in Mathematics Instruction (The Wiskobas Project, Reidel,
Dordrecht, 1987), p. 372.
21Suzanne Brahmia, Andrew Boudreaux, and Stephen E. Kanim,“Developing mathematical creativity with physics invention tasks,”
arXiv:1602.02033 (2017).
22Suzanne Brahmia, Andrew Boudreaux, and Stephen E. Kanim, “Obstacles
to mathematization in introductory physics,” arXiv:1601.01235 (2016).
23Bruce L. Sherin, “How students understand physics equations?,” Cognit.
Instr. 19(4), 479–541 (2001).
24Bruce L. Sherin, “Common sense clariﬁed: The role of intuitive knowl-
edge in physics problem solving,” J. Res. Sci. Teach. 43(6), 535–555
(2006).
25Jonathan Tuminaro and Edward F. Redish, “Elements of a cognitive model
of physics problem solving: Epistemic games,” Phys. Rev. Spec. Top.
Phys. Educ. Res. 3(2), 020101 (2007).
26Dina Zohrabi Alaee, Eleanor C. Sayre, and Scott V. Franklin, “Meanings of
the equals sign in upper-level undergraduate problem solving,” in Physics
E d u c a t i o nR e s e a r c hC o n f e r e n c e (PER Conference, Washington, DC, 2018).
27L. Burton and C. Morgan, “Mathematicians writing,” J. Res. Math. Educ.
31(4), 429–453 (2000).
28Gunther Kress, Multimodality: A Social Semiotic Approach to Contemporary
Communication (Routledge, Abingdon and New York, 2010), p. 212.
29Hugh D. Young, University Physics with Modern Physics (Addison-
Wesley, Boston, 2015).
30E. Krane and S. Kenneth, Modern Physics (Wiley, New York, 1995).
31John R. Taylor, Classical Mechanics (University Science Books,
Sausalito, 2005).
32David J. Grifﬁths, Introduction to Electrodynamics (Prentice Hall,
Hoboken, 1999).
33David J. Grifﬁths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (Pearson Prentice
Hall, Hoboken, 2005).
34B. Rittle-Johnson and Robert S. Siegler, “The relation between conceptualand procedural knowledge in learning mathematics: A review,” in The
Development of Mathematical Skills (Psychology Press/Taylor & Francis,
New York, 1998).
35R. S. Russ, V. R. Lee, and B. L. Sherin, “Framing in cognitive clinicalinterviews about intuitive science knowledge: Dynamic student under-
standings of the discourse interaction,” Sci. Educ. 96, 573–599 (2012).
278 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Alaee et al. 278 04 October 2023 23:06:33
