
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2023
Implementing a course-based authentic learning experience
with upper- and lower-division physics classesa) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Mikkel Herholdt Jensen ; Eliza J. Morris ; M. W . Ray
Am. J. Phys.  91, 696–700 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0137141
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Authentication scheme interface for mobile e-health monitoring using unique and lightweight identity-based
authentication
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2016)
Timestamp-based password authentication scheme
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2018) 04 October 2023 22:56:20
Implementing a course-based authentic learning experience
with upper- and lower-division physics classesa)
Mikkel Herholdt Jensen,b)Eliza J. Morris,c)and M. W. Rayd)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, California State University, Sacramento, Sacramento, California 95819
(Received 30 November 2022; accepted 28 March 2023)
We describe a dual-class authentic learning experience (ALE) in which undergraduate upper-
division physics students develop low-cost instruments, which are then used by students in a lower-
division course to monitor water quality in rivers. The ALE bridges the experiences of lower- and
upper-division physics majors by involving students across different stages of their college careers ina collaborative project. Lower-division physics students characterize, calibrate, and troubleshoot the
instrument prototypes developed by their upper-division peers, and their work informs instrument
modiﬁcations in future upper-division physics classes. This paper describes the ﬁrst iteration of thisproject along with student perceptions. We ﬁnd that lower-division students report an increase in
their awareness of possible upper-division projects, an increased sense that their coursework has
real-world applications, and a heightened understanding of how physicists can play a role in researchon environmental issues.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0137141
I. INTRODUCTION
The implementation of course-based undergraduate
research experiences (CUREs) in science, technology, engi-neering, and math (STEM) college education has beenshown to convey multiple beneﬁts, including increased stu-
dent retention, growth in translational skills such as commu-
nication and teamwork, and a strengthening of the students’science identity.
1Student retention is a particularly pressing
issue in STEM with attrition disproportionately affecting
persons excluded because of their ethnicity or race(PEERs).2,3Since it is implemented in a course, a CURE can
be a more equitable tool for providing research experiences
and, thus, improving retention rates among underrepresentedgroups in STEM.4
In this paper, we describe the implementation of a similar
program called a course-based authentic learning experience
(ALE). An ALE differs from a CURE in that it can includeany project-based activity, including, but not limited to,
research projects. (“Authentic” here refers to an activity that
a professional in a particular discipline would do.) Our ALEbridges upper- and lower-division physics classes where stu-
dents in an upper-division advanced electronics course build
instruments capable of measuring temperature, depth, andturbidity of the American River, which runs by our campus.The students in this course are tasked with designing and
building the instruments and the user interface. Students in a
lower-division laboratory course will then use them to studythe properties of the river. In this ﬁrst iteration of the project,
students developed and tested the instruments in the labora-
tory only. The feedback from the ﬁrst iteration will then beused by the next set of students in the upper-division course
to improve the instruments. In addition to providing students
with authentic learning experiences as part of their course-work, this project also aims to provide a link between the
lower- and upper-division experiences for our majors and
seeks to integrate aspects of societal and environmentalissues into the physics curriculum to heighten students’
awareness of the role physics can play in these areas.
The American River is a rich natural resource in the
Sacramento area that serves numerous stakeholders. It ishome to hundreds of species and provides a breeding ground
for numerous ﬁsh species, including the endangered Chinooksalmon. At the same time, it serves as an area for human rec-
reation, both in the river and in adjacent green spaces. It also
supplies water to a large segment of the Sacramento popula-tion. Furthermore, Sacramento is historically a ﬂood plain,and regular ﬂooding was a part of life for those living alongthe river. Slightly upstream from Sacramento State are aseries of dams that, together with the extensive levee struc-
ture, keep the water in the river. These dams not only sup-
press ﬂoods but also raise the water levels for navigation andgenerate hydroelectric power. They also substantially alterthe ecology of the downstream river. Since their creation inthe 1950s, there has been a need to balance the demands ofall stakeholders, including the riparian wildlife, which has
seen a marked reduction in habitat.
5Part of maintaining this
balance is a careful monitoring of the river and its propertiessuch as ﬂow and temperature. Indeed, the United StatesGeological Survey (USGS) monitors depth, ﬂow, and tem-perature at multiple sites along the river. These sampling
locations are often along bridge pylons near the middle of
the river. To better understand the full hydrological pictureof the river, the long-term goal of our project is to developinexpensive instruments capable of measuring hydrologicalproperties of the river at multiple transverse locations acrossthe river. These instruments can capture not only tempera-
ture and ﬂow but also turbidity, an important element in the
consideration of the river’s hydrology-sediment regime and,thus, the overall health of the river. Here, we report on theﬁrst phase of the project: The design, construction, and test-ing of the instruments, all of which was done by undergradu-ate students across two courses.
This project is one of numerous ongoing ALE projects
that are part of the National Science Foundation-funded pro-
gram Sustainable Interdisciplinary Research to InspireUndergraduate Success (NSF SIRIUS-II). SIRIUS-II is acontinuation of the original SIRIUS program,
6which demon-
strated that CURE projects result in an increase in student
self-efﬁcacy.7SIRIUS-II builds upon this program by (1)
expanding the idea of a CURE to include any authentic,course-based project and (2) extending the project to include
696 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 696 04 October 2023 22:56:20
projects involving the nearby Los Rios Community College
Campuses. SIRIUS-II projects focus on the American Riverand other Northern California waterways using ALEs to tie
together research and societal issues that are right in the stu-
dents’ backyards.
II. THE COURSES
A. Physics 116
Physics 116 is an advanced undergraduate-level electron-
ics and instrumentation course. Enrollment in this course istypically between ﬁve and ten students, and in the semester,this project was implemented, and ﬁve students wereenrolled in the course. Students taking this course, all ofwhom are physics majors, have already completed Physics
115, an undergraduate, upper-division course that introduces
students to basic electronics including both analog (DC, AC,semiconductors/op-amps) and digital circuits and analysis.In Physics 116, students learn advanced circuit analysis tech-niques such as Fourier analysis, along with digital signalprocessing and more advanced digital circuits (e.g., fre-
quency counters, pulse width modulators, and phase-locked
loops). In the lab portion of class, the focus is on learninginstrumentation techniques that can be useful in a physicslaboratory. This includes using LabVIEW, programmingmicrocontrollers, and interfacing the two so that measure-ment data can be collected and processed on a computer.
The course involves a student-driven project where students
build an instrument that can perform a measurement of somephysical quantity. Thus, this was an ideal class in which toimplement the ALE.
B. Physics 11B
Physics 11B is our department’s third and ﬁnal physics
course in our lower-division calculus-based series. Students
taking the course have already completed lower-division
mechanics and electricity and magnetism physics courses.The course covers the basics of thermodynamics and statisti-cal mechanics, wave mechanics, light, sound, ﬂuid dynam-ics, and an introduction to topics of modern physics.Typically, 15–20 students enroll in the course each semester.
Most of the students taking the course are physics or chemis-
try majors, and typically, about half the students enrolled arephysics majors.
Laboratory classes in Physics 11B traditionally include
self-contained labs, in which students complete in the allottedlab time by following a lab manual outlining the procedureand analysis. The lab exercises are related to the topics of the
lecture/discussion portion of the course, but also have over-
arching themes common to all the labs, such as analyzingexperimental uncertainty, distinguishing between random andsystematic uncertainty, laboratory conduct, and communica-tion of results. Students in Physics 11B are completing theirclassical physics framework at the lower-division level, mak-
ing the course a good candidate for an ALE. The course is
also the ﬁnal stepping stone into the more advanced and spe-cialized upper-division courses, providing an opportunity tointroduce students in Physics 11B to elements of upper-division coursework and help bridge the lower- and upper-division course experience, as well as to integrate the cohorts
of physics students from the lower-division and upper-
division courses through the ALE experience.III. INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT
Five instruments were developed in Physics 116 during
the Spring 2022 semester as part of the ALE: Two that mea-sure temperature and one each that measure depth, turbidity,and ﬂow speed. To build their instruments, students ﬁrstselected a sensor, then developed a circuit to use the sensor,and ﬁnally determined a method for computing the value ofthe measurement. Though ﬁve instruments were developed,only the three instruments shown in the top of Fig. 1were
viable at the end of the semester and were used in the ﬁrstiteration of the Physics 11B portion of the project.
To measure temperature, an LM335 sensor was used.
8
This sensor is a Zener diode with a reverse bias breakdownvoltage that is dependent on temperature, V
z!VzTðÞ. A cir-
cuit that measures the temperature of the sensor is shown inFig.2(a). The diode is biased in the reverse direction with a
voltage V
salong with a current-limiting resistor. As long as
the supply voltage is larger than the reverse bias breakdownvoltage, the voltage across the diode will measure the Zenervoltage (or reverse bias breakdown voltage), V
zTðÞ. The sen-
sitivity of the sensor is speciﬁed as 10 mV//C14C, so all that is
needed to determine the temperature is a single-point calibra-
tion of T0and V0, and then the temperature can be found:
T¼T0þV/C0V0 ðÞ ð 100 8C=VÞ.
The turbidimeter is slightly more complicated using light
scattering to make the measurements. The circuit diagramfor this instrument is shown in Fig. 2(b). It consists of an
LED and two photodiodes: One placed directly in front ofthe LED to measure transmitted light and the other placed90
/C14to the ﬁrst photodiode to measure scattered light. In this
Fig. 1. Top: Instruments developed and used for the SIRIUS-II project that
measure (from left to right) temperature, turbidity, and depth. Bottom:
Inside of the interface box for the turbidimeter instrument showing the PSoC
microcontroller.
697 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Jensen, Morris, and Ray 697 04 October 2023 22:56:20
ﬁrst student design, no special care was taken to collimate the
LED light. Turbidity is usually measured in NephelometricTurbidity Ratio Units (NTRU), which is the ratio of thescattered light to transmitted light, T ¼I
s=dItðÞ,w h e r e Is
is the intensity of scattered light, Itis the intensity of transmit-
ted light, and dis a calibration constant, which is determined
so that the turbidity of air is 1 NTRU.9Since the current
produced by the photodiode is proportional to the intensityof light, the turbidity can be determined by taking the ratioof the voltages measured from the two photodiodes. Theinstrument works by ﬁrst making measurements in air todetermine d, before immersing the sensor in water and using
the transmitted and scattered light signals to compute theturbidity.
Finally, a Honeywell PX2 pressure transducer was
employed to measure depth.
10This sensor outputs a voltage
that is proportional to the absolute pressure. From this mea-surement, the hydrostatic pressure of a ﬂuid column,P¼qgh, is used to compute the height of the column of the
water above the gauge (i.e., the depth). To determine thepressure, we use the fact that the ratio of the measured volt-age, V
out, to the full-scale voltage, Vmax, is equal to the ratio
of the pressure measurement, P, to the full-scale pressure,
Pmax, so that P¼Vout=Vmax ðÞ Pmax. As the sensor measures
absolute pressure, we need to subtract the atmospheric pres-
sure to obtain the hydrostatic pressure of the water, or gauge
pressure, PW¼P/C0Patm, which can then be used to deter-
mine the depth of the sensor. Thus, an initial pressure mea-surement in air is ﬁrst made to determine P
atm, which is then
used as a reference to determine the gauge pressure anddepth in subsequent measurements.
All the instruments are run by a PSoC 5 microcontroller.11
The advantage of this controller over others, such as the
Arduino, is that (1) it contains on-chip analog and digital sig-nal processing components, allowing students to more easily
do some basic signal processing (e.g., ampliﬁcation, ﬁltering,
etc.) without having to build extra circuitry into the instru-ment; and (2) these microcontrollers are relatively inexpen-sive and can sometimes even be obtained for free.
12
Programming of the microcontroller is done through PSoCCreator, which is a programming environment developed bythe chip manufacturer, Inﬁneon, and available for free. Ituses a combination of graphical and C-based programming.Figure 3shows an example of the graphical portion of the
program: the signal routing for the turbidimeter. In this case,
the signals from the two photodiodes are ﬁrst sent through an
ampliﬁer before being digitized by a delta-sigma analog-to-digital converter (ADC).Once digitized, a limited amount of processing can occur
in the C-based code before the data are sent via USB to acomputer that accompanies the instrument. Here, the dataare collected by a LabVIEW program, written as part of theALE, which applies the calibration. The LabVIEW programalso serves as the main user interface for the instrument.Students in Physics 116 also wrote a “user manual” for theirinstrument, which detailed the methods and concepts rele-vant to the instrument, as well as basic operating instruc-tions. This manual was provided to the Physics 11B studentsfor their part of the ALE.
IV. INSTRUMENT CHARACTERIZATION
AND IMPLEMENTATION
The ALE was implemented in Physics 11B lab during the
subsequent semester of Fall 2022. Students were introducedto the project early in the semester, and their role in the pro-ject was described as testers for the prototype instrumentsdeveloped by upper-division physics majors. Students workedin teams of ﬁve or six during two three-hour lab periods in thelatter half of the semester to characterize and calibrate theinstruments, develop standard operating procedures, and writea report summarizing the equipment capabilities and outlining
future improvements and features needed to deploy the instru-
ments in the river. In contrast to the more traditional lab exer-cises used in the course, the project description waspurposefully kept open-ended. Along with the rationale andlong-term goals of the project, students were told that the goalof their ﬁrst project day was to develop a standard operatingprocedure (SOP) for the instrument with sufﬁcient detail thatanother student in the class could use it, as well as a procedurefor characterizing both the random and systematic error of theinstrument. Students were instructed to include a schematic oftheir plan, a complete list of materials needed, a step-by-stepFig. 2. Circuit diagrams for (a) temperature measurements showing the
LM335 temperature sensor, which operates as a Zener diode where the
Zener voltage is a function of temperature, and (b) the turbidimeter which
consists of an LED and photodiodes PD1, which measures scattered light,
and PD2, which measures the transmitted light.
Fig. 3. Graphical portion of the microcontroller’s programming for the turbi-dimeter. The two measured voltages (Pin_1 and Pin_2) ﬁrst pass through
non-inverting ampliﬁers PGA_1 and PGA_2, before going to a delta-sigma
ADC. Once digitized, the data are sent via USB to a computer for
processing.
698 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Jensen, Morris, and Ray 698 04 October 2023 22:56:20
plan for collecting any necessary data, and their plan for how
to analyze and interpret the data, but the exact protocol devel-opment was left for the teams to decide upon with instructor
input as needed.
Based on these instructions, the students developed proto-
cols to characterize their team’s instrument (see Fig. S1 in thesupplementary material for examples of student data
13). For
example, to test the depth measurements, students used a col-
umn of water and a ruler and applied their knowledge of
hydrostatic pressure to test the accuracy of the sensor. To testthe turbidimeter, students used trays of water with a knownconcentration of dissolved milk powder. Unfortunately, a
problem with one of the photodiodes prevented the students
from computing the turbidity in NTRU, but they were able toshow a clear relationship between the milk powder concentra-tion and the amount of light the photodiode detected. Finally,
students used a liquid-in-glass thermometer and a water bath
to test the temperature measurements and were able to iden-tify the functional range of the sensor based on their measure-ments. These data will be used in the next Physics 116 class
to improve the accuracy of the instruments.
During the Physics 11B laboratory time, one physics
major from the Spring 2022 Physics 116 class was hired as adepartment student assistant to aid students in the lab as theyworked on the instruments. As part of this role, the former
Physics 116 student also discussed their experience develop-
ing the instruments in the Spring 2022 upper-division classand their experience being part of the ALE in general.
To help scaffold the students’ work on the project, all teams
were provided a rubric to follow when writing their ﬁnal report.The rubric items called for speciﬁc sections to be included in
the report: (1) an abstract of the report summarizing their ﬁnd-
ings; (2) an introduction to the project; (3) a procedure, includ-ing their standard operating procedure; (4) analysis of randomand systematic instrument uncertainty; (5) the results of their
testing; and (6) a conclusion succinctly summarizing the out-
comes of the work and outlining future work to improve anddeploy the instruments in the river. The report was also gradedon the quality and clarity of the writing.
V. DISCUSSION
The ALE aimed to achieve several goals. First, the imple-
mentation of an ALE is known to increase students’ invest-ment in the course. Furthermore, having students work on
real-life problems helps them build science identity and
develop a sense of belonging in science, especially for stu-dents traditionally underrepresented in science.
14Through
their work, students explored several concepts relevant to
scientiﬁc experimentation, including random error, system-
atic error, instrument calibration, and the idea of a reference.They also practiced open-ended experimental problem solv-ing not typically captured to an equal degree in more tradi-
tional labs, in which students are given speciﬁc instructions
and procedures to arrive at a known result. Student workshowed indications that these goals were being met. Forexample, the group of students characterizing the turbidity
instrument determined an experimental relationship between
the voltage and the concentration of milk powder in solutionand proceeded to analyze the uncertainty inherent in theirdata, as well as systematic errors. The group also summa-
rized a list of suggested improvements, including issues with
one of the light diodes not responding as intended and ideasfor how to deploy the instrument in the river in an actualexperiment. This feedback, along with other similar feed-
back from the other groups, will be used by the next Physics116 class to improve the functionality of the instruments.
When asked to share any additional comments about their
experience working on the project, several Physics 11B stu-dents mentioned the satisfaction gained from a project withtangible applications, e.g.,: “I appreciated working on some-thing with real-world value and doing something more in labthan repeating steps from the manual,” and “I liked theinvolvement in a real-world issue.” Several students alsoreported an increased appreciation for the complicationsassociated with experimental research, especially the impor-tance of understanding experimental uncertainty, e.g.,:“When it comes to working [on] the river instrument project,it made me realize just how much consideration and inputneeds to be [given to assigning] uncertainty to values.”
Additionally, by having the ALE span a lower- and an
upper-division physics course, we aimed to use the ALEexperience to help lower-division students transition into theupper division by involving them in project work withadvanced upper-division students. Finally, the ALE wasdesigned to highlight the importance of the physical sciencesin understanding today’s environmental and societal issues.The goal was to both demonstrate to students one possiblerole physics can play in addressing environmental and socie-tal problems and to heighten the sense of social responsibil-ity borne by scientists, a topic often not given much weightin a traditional physics curriculum.
Students from the Fall 2022 Physics 11B class generally
reported a heightened awareness of future upper-division phys-ics projects, a better understanding of how their classworkcould have real world impact, and a heightened appreciation ofhow physics might be involved in environmental researchwhen surveyed at the end of the Fall 2022 semester (see Fig.S2 of the supplementary material for data
13). Students were
asked to respond on a 1-to-5 Likert scale on how they agreedwith three statements: “My experience working on the riverinstruments in Physics 11B gave me a better idea of the typesof projects available to me through upper-divisioncoursework” (Question 1, average response 4.0/5), “My expe-rience working on the river instruments in Physics 11B madem et h i n kt h ew o r kId oi nm yc l a s s e sc a nh a v ed i r e c t ,r e a l -world applications outside the classroom setting” (Question 2,average response 4.5/5), and “My experience working on theriver instruments in Physics 11B made me more aware of howphysicists might be involved in research on environmentalissues” (Question 3, average response 4.69/5).
Due to the small enrollment in Physics 116, we did not
collect similar data about students’ perception of the project.
However, we can say that students in this class gained valu-
able experience in using low-cost sensors and electrical com-ponents to develop instrumentation that will be used bysomeone other than themselves. The autonomy that studentshad in designing, building, and testing their instruments hasbeen linked to a sense of ownership in the project, whichleads to an increase in engagement and better outcomes.
15,16
Though not as sophisticated as the commercially available
counterparts, students in both classes gained an intimateknowledge of how the sensors are incorporated along withother electronic components to perform measurements. Infuture iterations of this project, we hope to begin collectingdata that highlights these outcomes.
This dual-class ALE is designed to allow for sustainable
future implementations in the Physics 11B and Physics 116
699 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Jensen, Morris, and Ray 699 04 October 2023 22:56:20
classes. The structure pairs the development in Physics 116
with the troubleshooting and development in Physics 11B.After Fall 2022, the project work in Physics 11B will informfuture student work in Physics 116 to further develop theinstruments, which will then be used in subsequent Physics11B classes. What is particularly interesting in this project isthat in the next iteration, some of the developers in theupper-division course will be from the class that originallyused and characterized the instruments. This provides aunique opportunity for these students to see both sides of theprocess, and it will be particularly interesting to observe theirperceptions of the project.
We also anticipate that the design will allow for a continua-
tion of the ALE project without any substantial costs, as thesame instruments will be utilized in future semesters. Finally,once fully developed, the instruments can continue to be used in
classes in gathering temperature, turbidity, and depth measure-
ments in the river to create a publicly available data set used bystakeholders and agencies monitoring river water quality.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have implemented a course-based authentic learning
experience (ALE) spanning both upper- and lower-divisionphysics classes that seeks to monitor the hydrology of theAmerican River, a local river that runs by the campus ofCalifornia State University, Sacramento. In this project, upper-division students developed and built instruments to measurethe temperature, depth, and turbidity of the river, while studentsin the lower-division class characterized and tested the instru-ments. We stress that this paper describes the ﬁrst implementa-tion of an iterative process, and as such, our sample size of
students is still quite small; however, we intend to continue col-
lecting data on student perceptions of the project to help usgauge the outcomes. In addition, as the instrument design isﬁnalized and the instruments are deployed in the river by stu-dents, the data collection and analysis could become part of abroader unit on environmental physics.
The project provides students with several positive outcomes:
(1) it gives students experience applying their physics training tosolving real-world problems, (2) it establishes a link betweenlower-division students and more senior upper-division students,and (3) it gives students a unique perspective on how their phys-ics training can be used to study the environment. In all, thisproject provides students with opportunities to gain ﬁrst-handexperience in designing, building, testing, and ultimately usinginstrumentation in an interdisciplinary setting.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank K. McDonald, E.
Gonzalez-Orta, and C. Ishikawa for guiding us through thisproject and providing us with helpful feedback on this paper.Funding for this project was provided by the National
Science Foundation under No. DUE 2012891.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the envi-
ronment, sustainability, and climate change.
b)ORCID: 0000-0002-4821-3318.
c)ORCID: 0000-0002-4658-502X.
d)ORCID: 0000-0002-8829-1257.
1J. A. Mraz-Craig et al. , “Student identities in authentic course-based
undergraduate research experience,” J. College Sci. Teaching 48(1), 68–75
(2018).
2C. Riegle-Crumb, B. King, and Y. Irizarry, “Does STEM stand out?Examining racial/ethnic gaps in persistence across postsecondary ﬁelds,”
Educ. Res. 48(3), 133–144 (2019).
3D. J. Asai, “Race matters,” Cell181(4), 754–757 (2020).
4Gita Bangera and Sara E. Brownwell, “Course-based undergraduate expe-
riences can make scientiﬁc research more inclusive,” CBE-Life Sci. Educ.
13, 602–607 (2014).
5W. L. Graf, “Downstream hydrologic and geomorphic effects of large
dams on American rivers,” Geomorphology 79(3–4), 336–360 (2006).
6Kelly K. McDonald et al. , “A faculty development model for transforming
a department’s laboratory curriculum with course-based undergraduate
research experiences,” J. Coll. Sci. Teach. 48(3), 15–23 (2019).
7A. Martin et al. , “Course-based undergraduate research experiences span-
ning two semesters of biology impact student self-efﬁcacy but not future
goals,” J. College Sci. Teaching 50(4), 33–47 (2021), available at https://
www.nsta.org/journal-college-science-teaching/journal-college-science-te
aching-marchapril-2021/course-based .
8Manufactured by Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX 75265, and can be pur-
chased at any major electronics supplier such as Newark or Digikey. Datasheet available: <https://www.ti.com/product/LM335 >
9B. G. Kitchener, J. Wainwright, and A. J. Parsons, “A review of the princi-
ples of turbidity measurement,” Prog. Phys. Geography 41(5), 620–642
(2017).
10Manufactured by Honeywell Sensing and Safety Technologies,Richardson, TX 75081.
11Manufactured by Inﬁneon Technologies AG, Germany.
12Inﬁneon University Alliance Technology Grant Program: <https://
www.inﬁneon.com/cms/en/product/promopages/university-alliance/ >
13See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/10.
1119/5.0137141 for samples of data collected by students, and details of
survey responses.
14C. R. Starr et al. , “Engaging in science practices in classrooms predicts
increases in undergraduates’ STEM motivation, identity, and achievement: A
short-term longitudinal study,” J. Res. Sci. Teaching 57(7), 1093–1118 (2020).
15N. Hall and D. Webb, “Instructors’ support of student autonomy in an
introductory physics course,” Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 10, 020116
(2014).
16D. R. Dounas-Frazer, J. T. Stanley, and H. J. Lewandowski, “Student own-ership of projects in an upper-division optics laboratory course: A multiple
cast study of successful experiences,” Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 13,
020136 (2017).
700 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Jensen, Morris, and Ray 700 04 October 2023 22:56:20
