
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkJANUARY 01 2023
In this issue: January 2023 
Mario Belloni  
 ; Adam Fritsch ; Beth Parks  
 ; B. Cameron Reed  
 ; Todd Springer
Am. J. Phys.  91, 5–6 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0134015
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Two “V oiceprint” Cases
J Acoust Soc Am  (February 1974)
Radio Bursts in the Active Period January 2005
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2006)
The January 1959 AAPT apparatus competition
Physics T oday  (June 1959) 04 October 2023 22:48:36
In this issue: January 2023
Mario Belloni, Adam Fritsch, Beth Parks, B.Cameron Reed, and Todd Springer Editors
(Received 7 November 2022; accepted 8 November 2022)
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0134015
These brief summaries are designed to help readers easily
see which articles will be most valuable to them. The online
version contains links to the articles.
Resource Letter CP-3: Computational Physics
Timothy Atherton
91(1), p. 7
Computation has become an indispensable tool in all areas
of physics. As the role of computation grows, it is importantto ask how, when, and to whom we teach computation in the
physics curriculum. Building on the ﬁrst two Computational
Physics Resource Letters, this new Resource Letter aims toprovide resources to educators who want to incorporate com-
putation into their teaching as part of equitable practices.
The drift motion of a spinning ball on carpet
Keith Zengel and Chris Tamer
91(1), p. 28
A ball spinning about a vertical axis while rolling along a
deformable carpet experiences a drift force perpendicular toits instantaneous velocity, a consequence of a kinetic fric-
tional force that acts near the forward point of contact
between the ball and the carpet. This force is in addition to aforce of rolling friction that acts perpendicular to the direc-
tion of forward motion, also ahead of the ball’s center of
mass. This article, which is appropriate for students inadvanced dynamics classes, analyzes this motion and tests
the theory for a golf ball and a superball rolled on high- and
low-pile carpets. Not to be missed is a photo of a cat ready topounce on a superball.
The mass spectrum of quarkonium using matrix
mechanics
Aissa Belhouari
91(1), p. 34
Quantum mechanics is infamous for having very few
exactly-solvable problems; every student needs to see ana-
lytic and numerical approximation methods. This paper
applies a matrix diagonalization/numerical integrationmethod to solve for the energy eigenvalues and hence the
mass spectrum of charmonium, a quark/antiquark analog to
hydrogen. The results are in close accord with other theoreti-cal treatments and experimental results for this system. This
approach uses the familiar inﬁnite-well wavefunctions as a
set of basis states, which should be applicable to other prob-lems. Appropriate for intermediate and upper-level students.
Adaptable research-based materials for teaching
quantum mechanics
Steven Pollock, Gina Passante, and Homeyra Sadaghiani
91(1), p. 40The authors present a large collection of resources for
teaching undergraduate quantum mechanics that will be pri-marily useful in a “spins ﬁrst” approach. Readers will ﬁnd
descriptions of the materials, which include clicker ques-
tions, pre-lecture surveys, and homework and exam ques-
tions, along with valuable notes for how they can be used in
classes.
Low-cost automated spin coater and thermal annealer
for additive prototyping of multilayer Bragg reflectors
Nathan J. Dawson, Yunli Lu, Zoe Lowther, Jacob Abell,
Nicholas D. Christianson, Aaron W. Weiser, and Gioia
Aquino
91(1), p. 48
Photonic crystals such as Bragg reﬂectors can be con-
structed from alternating thin layers of polymers. The pro-
cess is simple in principle, but it requires automation due tothe large number of layers needed. This paper shows how an
automated spin coater can be built using inexpensive repur-
posed materials and gives examples of projects that under-
graduates can complete using it.
Experimental realization of an additively-manufactured
monatomic lattice for studying wave propagation
Nehemiah Mork, Sai A. R. Kuchibhatla, Michael J.
Leamy, and Matthew D. Fronk
91(1), p. 56
Undergraduates studying wave propagation through solids
often model such waves as phonons traveling through simple
lattices. However, calculations of such systems are often dif-ﬁcult for students to directly reproduce in the lab. In this
paper, the authors describe a simple 3-D printing approach
that enables the construction of a macro-scale monatomic
lattice for which the dispersion curve can be experimentally
calculated using a 2-D Fourier transform, enabling a hands-on student experience with phononic systems and additive
manufacturing.
Unexpected optimal measurement protocols in Bell’s
inequality violation experiments
Alicia Ne `gre, Renaud Mathevet, Benoit Chalopin, and
S/C19ebastien Massenot
91(1), p. 64
The violation of Bell’s inequality, which demonstrates the
non-locality of quantum mechanical states, can be measured
experimentally in student laboratories. When performing this
experiment, the authors noticed that the measurement error
exhibited an unexpected dependence on the ordering of
polarizer rotations. This paper shares their conﬁrmation of
the effect via careful experiments and computational simula-
tions. Readers may be inspired to consider other experimen-
tal situations that could show similar effects due to
correlations between measurements.
5 Am. J. Phys. 91(1), January 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 5 04 October 2023 22:48:36
Concerning classical forces, energies, and potentials for
accelerated point charges
Timothy H. Boyer
91(1), p. 74
The interplay between electric and magnetic ﬁelds is one
of the many reasons that students ﬁnd electrodynamics to bea difﬁcult subject. As an example, the source of changes inmagnetic ﬁeld energy is often not obvious. Magnetic forcescannot be directly responsible for energy changes since theydo no work. Instead, such energy changes can be related toelectric ﬁelds in an intricate way. In this paper, the subtletiesof magnetic ﬁeld energy changes are explored in various sit-uations using the Darwin Lagrangian, an approximation tothe full theory of electrodynamics. Students and instructorsof electromagnetism courses will beneﬁt from an example
involving two accelerating point charges, which helps to
shed light on the subtle connections between electricity and
magnetism.
The law of entropy increase for bodies in mutual thermal
contact
Ramandeep S. Johal
91(1), p. 79
This brief Note shares an elegant way to show students
that, when two bodies at unequal temperatures are placed in
thermal contact and allowed to reach an equilibrium com-
mon temperature, the total entropy increases.
6 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 1, January 2023 Belloni et al. 6 04 October 2023 22:48:36
