
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkEDITORIAL| MAY 01 2023
In this issue: May 2023 
John Essick ; Claire A. Marrache-Kikuchi ; Beth Parks  
 ; B. Cameron Reed  
 ; Keith Zengel
Am. J. Phys.  91, 333 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0151421
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A low-cost confocal microscope for the undergraduate lab
Am. J. Phys.  (May 2023)
Organ acoustics and the concert hall
J Acoust Soc Am  (September 1998)
Existing aeroacoustic issues of building elements
J Acoust Soc Am  (September 2018) 04 October 2023 22:51:45
In this issue: May 2023
John Essick, Claire A. Marrache-Kikuchi, Beth Parks, B.Cameron Reed,
and Keith Zengel Editors
(Received 21 March 2023; accepted 22 March 2023)
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0151421
These brief summaries are designed to help readers easily
see which articles will be most valuable to them. The onlineversion contains links to the articles.
On the bifurcation behavior of a folded notebook page
Chenguang Zhang
91(5), p. 335
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0097340What do the budworm population, the distribution of
debris of the Sagittarius dwarf, coupled quantum wells, orthe non-linear Chua’s circuit have in common? These are allbifurcating systems. To this large variety of systems, you
can now add the singly folded notebook page. Indeed, the
present paper shows that the maximum length a notebookpage can extend outside the notebook area is a bifurcatingquantity that only depends on the aspect ratio of the page.
This nice example shows, using only elementary undergrad-
uate calculus, that bifurcations can be found everywhere innature, even in the classroom. It is suitable for an undergrad-
uate calculus course, a computer-based problem-solving
course, or an undergraduate introduction to phase transitions.
Paragliders’ launch trajectory is universal
Quentin Da Cruz Lopes, Sophie Ramananarivo, Caroline
Cohen, and Michael Benzaquen
91(5), p. 340
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0101359Help your students acquire a bird’s-eye view of classical
mechanics with this paper! Using Newton’s second law andthe angular momentum theorem, they will be able to recon-struct the launch trajectory of anyparaglider, whatever its
size and whatever the force exerted on the wing. They will
also learn about nondimensionalization along the way. Youcould use this as a practical example for an undergraduatemechanics class, but you could also reproduce the very sim-
ple table-top experimental setup for a mechanics laboratory
or a student project.
The one-dimensional potential energy function that is
analogous to a two-dimensional track
Todd K. Timberlake and Robert Valentin Mbenoun
Mahend
91(5), p. 345
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0100950We often tell our students that a potential energy function
U(x) can be thought of as representing a particle sliding
along a track in a vertical plane, with peaks and valleys cor-responding to points of stable and unstable equilibrium.However, motion along a track of varying height z(x) occurs
in two dimensions, so the analogy is not exact. In this paper,
the authors show that an analysis of the horizontal motion ofa particle along a 2-D track in a uniform gravitational ﬁeldcan be made equivalent to that of a particle in 1-D motion by
developing an “analogous potential energy function” that
can be used to characterize the static and dynamic equilib-rium points and their corresponding oscillatory behaviors. In
general, a single track corresponds to many such analogous
functions, each with a different total energy. Suggestions forassociated student projects are given. The level is appropri-
ate for intermediate-level dynamics students.
Sliding and rolling along circular tracks in a vertical
plane
Rod Cross
91(5), p. 351
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0107553Many lecture demonstrations and lab activities involve
sliding or rolling an object along a curved ramp. When stu-
dents ask why the object does not return to its initial heighton the far side of the ramp, we tell them that it is because the
object lost energy to friction along the ramp. But how
exactly does this happen? This paper explores in detail theenergy losses experienced by a billiard ball rolling along a
curved track and a nut sliding along a curved wire and offers
recommendations on ways to reduce energy losses in typicallecture demonstrations.
Heavy symmetric tops and the Hannay angle
Changsoo Park
91(5), p. 357
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0101149When a spinning top experiences a precessional motion
such that the period of the precession is much longer than
that of the top, the periodic motion of the top is almost pre-served during a full cycle of the precession. It can be shown
that after one period of the precessional motion, the angle
variable (the conjugate quantity to the action variable) of thetop acquires a phase shift composed of two parts, termed thedynamical angle and geometric angle. The dynamical angle
depends on the period, but the geometric angle is determined
by the geometric nature of the precession. This geometriccontribution to the total phase shift of the angle variable is
called the Hannay angle after J. Hannay, who showed that
this angle it is identical to the solid angle subtended by theloop swept out by the symmetry axis of the top. Proofs
of this, however, typically invoke quite advanced
mathematics. In this paper, the author shows with standardspherical-coordinate dynamics that the Hannay angle can
also be described by the angle between two radial vectors on
the disk of the top, respectively corresponding to the purespinning motion and the coupled motion of spin and
precession for one period of the precession. Appropriate for
advanced dynamics students.
333 Am. J. Phys. 91(5), May 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 333 04 October 2023 22:51:45
Finding and improving bounds of real functions by
thermodynamic arguments
Andr /C19es Vallejo
91(5), p. 366
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0121919That thermal interactions cause the entropy of the
Universe to increase is a tenet of classical thermodynamics.This paper uses this principle to show how analytic expres-sions for bounds on mathematical functions such aslog(1þx) can be tightened by computing the entropy change
associated with changing the temperature of a system to adesired ﬁnal state by bringing it into contact with an increas-ing number of heat reservoirs of temperatures between thatof the object and the desired ﬁnal temperature. By having theobject initially hotter or colder than the desired ﬁnal temper-ature, both upper and lower bounds can be expressed. Thisshows students how a physical principle can be used toestablish results typically treated as arising from pure mathe-matics. Appropriate for intermediate-level students of ther-mal physics.
Introducing quantum mechanics through its historical
roots: The hydrogen Rydberg atom viewed through the
lens of the old quantum theory
M. G. Littman, E. Gordis, P. Zhelnin, and J. Arnold
91(5), p. 371
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0094860It’s well known that the Bohr model’s stability condition
is consistent with using the de Broglie wavelength to restrictthe possible radii of circular orbits. This paper shows howthe more general Bohr-Sommerfeld planetary orbits can alsobe understood using de Broglie waves, providing a linkbetween quantum and classical physics that may help stu-dents better understand both aspects of physics.
Applications of the eikonal approximation in quantum
mechanical scattering
Barry R. Holstein
91(5), p. 379
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0077649
Scattering amplitudes in quantum mechanics are often cal-
culated using the Born approximation, which does not embedgeneral properties such as unitarity, analyticity, or the opticaltheorem. The paper presents the less frequently discussedeikonal approximation with examples for electromagneticand gravitational interactions. This straightforward modiﬁca-tion is suitable for inclusion when scattering is introduced intypical quantum mechanics courses.
The discovery of a supermassive black hole at the center
of the Milky Way galaxy
Bryanne McDonough and Paul Withers
91(5), p. 386
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0086222The 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded for the dis-
covery of a supermassive compact object at the center of ourgalaxy as well as for the theoretical work showing that blackholes are a robust prediction of the general theory of relativ-
ity. Now your students can tie their classroom learning tothis Nobel Prize. The observations of stars orbiting near thegalactic center allow students who have learned aboutKeplerian orbits to quantify its mass. More advancedmechanics students can assess whether the mass could beconcentrated in a sphere or a disk. Students who havelearned about the Boltzmann constant can determine that acentral dust cloud of the necessary mass would not be stableagainst collapse, and students who have learned about colli-sions can rule out the possibility of a cluster of compactobjects. The data and models presented in this paper couldbe used individually as examples in physics courses on manylevels, or they could be combined in an upper-level course tohelp students understand the evidence for the presence of ablack hole at the galactic center.
Flexible, low-cost phase-sensitive detection for the
undergraduate laboratory with a Teensy microcontroller
Jerome Fung and Christopher L. Weil
91(5), p. 395
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0126691A low-cost setup to implement and explore phase-sensi-
tive detection is presented. The setup is based on the Teensy3.5 microcontroller and is controlled via user-written Pythonsoftware, which includes a graphical user interface. The per-formance of the setup is evaluated and a successful labora-tory measurement—measuring the distance dependence ofthe intensity of a light-emitting diode in the presence of envi-ronmental lighting—is demonstrated. The reasons for thechoice of the Teensy 3.5 device, in comparison with the pop-ular Arduino Uno, are given as well as a description of thelimitations of the setup (i.e., no front-end ampliﬁcation aswell as lack of synchronous lock in the external referencemode). This setup is a useful tool for teaching advancedphysics students about the phase-sensitive detection experi-mental technique, and it can be a viable low-cost alternativeto commercial lock-in ampliﬁers for certain researchsituations.
A low-cost confocal microscope for the undergraduate
lab
A. Reguilon, W. Bethard, and E. Brekke
91(5), p. 404
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0128277This paper presents a confocal microscope setup intended
for pedagogical purposes. The simplicity and cost-efﬁcientdesign of the setup make it an excellent avenue for develop-ing student understanding of confocal microscopy and thephysics underlying this widely used experimental technique.Experimental results acquired using the setup–measuring thethickness and surface variation of a microscope slide–aregiven. In addition, suggestions for several further investiga-tions as well as expansions of the setup to improve its rangeof application are provided. This work provides an accessibleand affordable introduction to the topic of confocal micros-copy for optics, biophysics, and advanced instructional labo-ratory instructors and students.
334 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Essick et al. 334 04 October 2023 22:51:45
