
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| MAY 01 2023
Introducing quantum mechanics through its historical roots:
The hydrogen Rydberg atom viewed through the lens of the
old quantum theory
M. G. Littman ; E. Gordis ; P. Zhelnin ; J. Arnold
Am. J. Phys.  91, 371 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0094860
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A mechanical analog of Bohr ’s atom based on de Broglie’ s double-solution approach
Chaos  (October 2021)
The principle of relativity and the de Broglie relation
American Journal of Physics  (June 2016)
A classical analog of the quantum Zeeman ef fect
Chaos  (March 2022) 04 October 2023 22:52:10
Introducing quantum mechanics through its historical roots:
The hydrogen Rydberg atom viewed through the lensof the old quantum theory
M. G. Littman,a)E.Gordis,b)P.Zhelnin,c)and J. Arnoldd)
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544
(Received 6 April 2022; accepted 25 February 2023)
Solutions of Schr €odinger’s equation for Rydberg states of hydrogen are shown to display patterns
that can be understood semi-classically within the framework of Bohr-Sommerfeld planetary orbits
and de Broglie’s concept of matter waves. Using n¼10 and n¼100 quantum levels we show how
de Broglie-wave-analyzed Kepler orbits can be matched to excited-state wavefunctions and charge
distributions. Making the connection between the old and new quantum theories can help
beginning students develop an intuition about quantum mechanics and allow them to develop anappreciation of how Schr €odinger’s wave mechanics was stimulated by the theories of his
predecessors.
VC2023 Author(s) .All article content, except where otherwise noted, is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0094860
I. CIRCULAR ORBITS AND “CIRCULAR STATES”
Niels Bohr’s 1913 paper described an analytical method
that built upon Ernest Rutherford’s concept of an atom as a
positively charged nucleus surrounded by a system of nega-
tively charged electrons.1An early success of Bohr’s atomic
theory was its ability to derive and explain the empirical for-mula of Johannes Rydberg for the frequencies of spectral
lines of atomic hydrogen.2Bohr analyzed the hydrogen atom
as a single electron orbiting an inﬁnitely massive positivenucleus (that is, a single proton). He simpliﬁed the problem
by assuming further that the electron orbit was circular. Bohr
used non-relativistic classical mechanics as the foundationfor his analysis, but he also drew upon the work of Max
Planck to understand radiation associated with an orbiting
electron. Planck earlier had proposed the concept of theenergy-quanta to explain blackbody radiation.
3In Bohr’s
model, rather than an orbiting electron radiating energy con-
tinuously, he suggested that radiation from excited hydrogen
occurred in distinctly separated emissions (described today
as jumps) between stationary states. Stationary states ofhydrogen were those that satisﬁed an integer condition con-
nected with Planck’s idea of quantized action.
Bohr designated the integer factor in his analysis with s—
we will instead use n, which is known commonly as the prin-
cipal quantum number. Bohr showed that the energy of the
stationary states is proportional to /C01=n
2, and the angular
momentum of the stationary states is nh=2p, where his
Planck’s constant. Bohr identiﬁed a most tightly bound state
(the ground state) corresponding to the smallest possible pos-
itive integer, n¼1. The radius of the circular orbits accord-
ing to Bohr’s model is n2a0, where a0is the Bohr radius. The
model also shows that the electron velocity in an orbit is
v=c¼ð1=nÞð2pe2=ð4pe0hcÞÞ. (Here, e0is the permittivity of
free space.4) The numerical factor in the velocity relation-
ship is Sommerfeld’s ﬁne structure constant, a¼2pe2=
ð4pe0hcÞ/C251=137. The velocity scales as 1 =n. The energy of
stationary states of the electron according to the Bohr model
is/C0ðhc R 1Þ=n2, where R1is the Rydberg constant and cis
the speed of light. Bohr’s derived formulas for both a0and
R1were given in terms of fundamental constants: the elec-
tron mass, m0; the electron charge, e; and Planck’s constant,h. Bohr’s value for R1based on fundamental constants is
very close to Rydberg’s experimentally determined value.
The notion of a moving electron as a wave is often invoked
in modern explanations of Bohr’s quantum theory, but the
concept did not emerge until about 10 years after Bohr’s land-
mark paper. Bohr only introduced a stability condition. Louis
de Broglie, drawing on the works of Maupertuis (principle ofleast action) and Fermat (principle of least time), reasoned
that particles following a trajectory have a wave nature. In a
paper published in 1925, de Broglie noted the connection
between the concept of a particle wave and Bohr’s stability
condition:5“Propagation is, therefore, analogue to a liquid
wave in a channel closed on itself but of variable depth. It is
physically obvious, that to have a stable regime, the length ofthe channel must be resonant with the wave; …The resonance
condition is L¼nkif the wavelength is constant …” [ Lis de
Broglie’s value for the length of the channel and nis an inte-
ger.] Then he continued in a later paragraph, “In the particular
case of closed circular Bohr orbits in an atom, one gets:
m
0ÞvdL¼2pRm 0v¼nh,w h e r e v¼Rx,w h e n xis angular
velocity, m0xR2¼nh=2p. This is exactly Bohr’s fundamen-
tal formula.” Since the circumference of the Bohr circle is
2pR, the wavelength extracted from Bohr’s formula is
k¼h=m0v, that is, de Broglie’s well known relationship. We
see that the circular Bohr orbit contains nelectron wave-
lengths, and the electron phase is a multiple of 2 patnpoints
equally spaced along the orbit.
Now we consider the Schr €odinger wavefunction, which in
a spherical basis ðr;h;uÞis characterized by the quantum
numbers, n;‘,a n d m. We will focus on the “circular state”6of
quantum level n, which has maximal values of both ‘andm,
namely, ‘¼n/C01a n d m¼6‘. Since we compare orbits to a
slice of the wavefunction, it is helpful ﬁrst to consider the big-
ger picture of what the electron charge distribution looks like
for the n¼10 “circular state.” This is given in Fig. 1, which
shows in 3D that the distribution appears as a torus centeredon the origin. The charge density peaks at a radius somewhere
between the inner and outer radii of the torus.
The sum of the squares of the real and the imaginary parts
of the wavefunction is used to compute the probability den-
sity in Fig. 1. Figure 2is a 2D contour plot of the real part of
the wavefunction in the x–yplane. Red contours are for
371 Am. J. Phys. 91(5), May 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp VCAuthor(s) 2023.
 371 04 October 2023 22:52:10
positive real values. Blue dashed contours are for negative
real values. Black lines indicate where the real part of thewavefunction is zero.
The imaginary part of the wavefunction in the x–yplane
has the same pattern as the real part shown in Fig. 2but isrotated about the z-axis by þ10
/C14(CCW) for the m¼þ9 state
and by /C010/C14(CW) for the m¼– 9 state. Because the n¼10
“circular state” has 9-fold symmetry, a spatial rotation of 40/C14
(that is, 360/C14=9) in either the CCW or CW direction about z
will leave the complex wavefunction unchanged. The 610/C14
relative rotation between real and imaginary parts means that
the azimuthal pattern of the real and imaginary parts oscillates
and is in quadrature (that is, one quarter of the way to the sym-metry rotation). This is fundamental.7It allows the sum of the
squares of real and imaginary parts to be constant as a function
of the azimuthal angle /. We are interested in using orbits to
understand spatial patterns in wavefunctions. Since the patternsof real and imaginary parts differ only by a rotation, we restrictour comparison, without loss of generality, to the real part of
the wavefunction. All subsequent mention of the wavefunc-
tion, therefore, will be the real part only.
We now compare Schr €odinger’s wavefunction for n¼10
“circular states” with Bohr’s circular orbit for n¼9a n d n¼10.
Why consider n¼9? We include the n¼9 orbit because
Schr €odinger and Bohr analyses differ in their values for angular
momentum. Schr €odinger’s value of angular momentum for
“circular states” of quantum level nisðn/C01Þh=2p, whereas
the circular orbits of Bohr for quantum level nhave angular
momentum nh=2p,t h a ti s , h=2plarger. The Bohr method over-
estimates angular momentum of each quantum level—thiswell-known ﬂaw of Bohr’s theory
8was corrected by
Schr €odinger in 1926.9This error leads Bohr to assume that the
angular momentum of the n¼1 ground state is h=2p, whereas
Schr €odinger’s ground state has angular momentum zero. So,
we will start by considering both n¼9a n d n¼10 Bohr orbits
in comparison with the n¼10 “circular state.” Plotted in Fig. 2
are contours of the Schr €odinger wavefunction in the x–yplane
as compared with these two Bohr orbits.
We see that while the n¼10 Bohr orbit does a good job at
matching the anti-node peaks of the real part of the wavefunc-tion, the red dots in that orbit miss the wavefunction phase
(that is, the oscillations)—whereas the red dots of the n¼9
Bohr orbit do a good job at matching the phase – they do thisbecause the angular momentum for the n¼9B o h rc a s e
matches the angular momentum (and the symmetry) of the
n¼10 circular Schr €odinger case. Our approach then for com-
paring Schr €odinger n¼10 results to the Bohr model is to use
then¼9 orbit but scaling it up in physical dimension by the
factor, 100/81. Now both the size of the orbit and the phase
will line up as shown in Fig. 4(a). For comparisons with states
of higher values of n,f o re x a m p l e , n¼100, as considered in
Sec. IIIof this paper, the scaling is not necessary because the
scale factor, ðn
2Þ=ðn/C01Þ2, approaches 1 when n is very
large, but we still will use a quantum number for Bohr orbitsthat is one less than that of the Schr €odinger state.
II. ELLIPTICAL ORBITS AND SPHERICAL STATES
In 1916, Sommerfeld expanded Bohr’s approach by
including the possibility of elliptical orbits.10–12This possi-
bility corrected a shortcoming of Bohr’s model by providingan analysis that improved comparison with experimentally
observed level splitting due to external electric and magnetic
ﬁelds. To allow elliptical orbits, Sommerfeld postulated anew quantum stability condition involving multiple quantumnumbers, that is, a quantum condition for each degree of
freedom for an orbit of an electron. He assumed that the orbit
was conﬁned to a plane, and therefore, there were two quan-tum conditions and two quantum numbers.
Fig. 1. A 3D contour plot of the electron charge probab ility density for the
n¼10 “circular state” of hydrogen. Here, ‘¼9, and m¼69. The charge prob-
ability density is given by the wavefunction multiplied by its complex conjugate.
One upper quadrant of the 3D contour plot has been removed to show that the
charge density is largest near the middle of the torus. a0is the Bohr radius.
Fig. 2. Contour plot of the real part n¼10,‘¼9;m¼69 “circular state”
wavefunction evaluated in the x–yplane. The imaginary part of the wave-
function has an identical pattern but is rotated about the z-axis by 610/C14. The
relative rotation means that the maxima of the imaginary part exactly coin-
cide with nodes of the real part and vice versa. The red-colored contour linescorrespond to the positive real value of the wavefunction, and blue-colored-
dashed lines correspond to the negative real values. Black lines indicate
where the real part of the wavefunction is zero. Shown also are Bohr’s orbits
forn¼9 and n¼10. The red dots are placed where the electron phase is a
multiple of 2 p. Each arc segment of the Bohr orbit is the electron wave-
length in that orbit. There are nine electron wavelengths in the n¼9 orbit
and ten electron wavelengths in the n¼10 orbit. a
0is the Bohr radius.
372 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Littman et al. 372 04 October 2023 22:52:10
Here, we compare the Bohr–Sommerfeld planar elliptical
orbits with the solutions of atomic wavefunctions. To begin,we restrict our attention to the x–yplane and consider only
Bohr–Sommerfeld orbits in that plane. The classical angularmomentum is perpendicular to the orbital plane. Thus, forthese orbits, the angular momentum points along the zaxis.
The Sommerfeld method, like that of Bohr, overestimatesthe total angular momentum by h=2p. In a state with princi-
pal quantum number n, the maximal values for the quantum
numbers ‘andmaren– 1. So, as in Sec. I, when we com-
pare the Bohr–Sommerfeld model to the Schr €odinger equa-
tion solutions, we compare cases of the same angularmomentum with the same projection of angular momentumalong the zaxis. Therefore, we match Bohr–Sommerfeld
orbits having quantum number, n– 1 (which have ‘values
that range from 1 to n– 1) to Schr €odinger wavefunctions for
states having quantum number, n(with ‘values that also
range from 1 to n– 1—the ‘¼0 case is not considered). We
also restrict the comparison to those mstates that have the
maximum angular momentum projection along z—that is,
m¼6‘, for each case.
Sommerfeld noted that Bohr’s circular orbits have only one
degree of freedom and that made it relatively easy to applyPlanck’s quantized action condition. The elliptical case formotion in a plane involves two degrees of freedom, and, there-fore, he postulated that the quantized action conditions forstability should also have two conditions:Þp
hdh¼nhhandÞprdr¼nrh,w h e r e nhþnr¼n. Here, ph¼m0r2dh=dtis
the moment of momentum, and pr¼m0dr=dtis the radial
component of momentum, which is m0times the radial veloc-
ity. Following this approach, he concluded that there are n
orbits that satisfy the stability condition for the quantum leveln: the circular orbit and n– 1 additional elliptical orbits. The
possible solutions have angular momenta ranging from nh=2p
down to h=2p. These correspond to n
hranging from ndown to
1. The case nh¼nis Bohr’s circular orbit. Sommerfeld elimi-
nated the case of nh¼0 arbitrarily, arguing that this case
would have the electron collide with the nucleus. Sommerfeldcomputed the n¼4 case as an example. He noted that the circle
and all the ellipses share a common semi-major axis, n
2a0.
Figure 3(a)is an image taken directly from Sommerfeld’s origi-
nal paper.10
As with our treatment of circular orbits and “circular
states,” we compare the size and phase of elliptical orbitswith Schr €odinger’s spherical states. To ﬁnd the phase, we
need to determine the electron velocity. For elliptical orbits,the velocity is not constant in time, so we need to solve theclassical Kepler problem.
13Knowing how the velocity variesalong the orbit will allow us then to determine the locations
along the elliptical path where the phase is a multiple of 2 p.
MATHEMATICA is used to solve for the Kepler orbits according
to the parametric equations
xðhÞ¼aðcosh/C0eÞ; (1)
yðhÞ¼bsinh; (2)
M¼xt¼h/C0esinh: (3)
Here, eis the eccentricity, ais the semi-major axis of the
ellipse, bis the semi-minor axis of the ellipse, xis the orbital
frequency in radians/seconds, and Mis the mean anomaly.
The equation for Mis Kepler’s equation. Sommerfeld’s
model provides expressions for a;b;e, and xin terms of n
and ‘:a¼n2a0;b¼n‘a0;e¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1/C0ðb2=a2Þp
; and x
¼ðm0e4Þ=ðð4pe0Þ2ðh=2pÞ3n3Þ. To solve for x(t) and y(t), we
invert Kepler’s equation to solve for hðtÞ. This cannot be
done analytically—so we invert it numerically using the“InverseFunction” function in
MATHEMATICA . Once we have
hðtÞ, we make a table of hðtÞ,x(t), and y(t). This table is
based on a time step of typically 10/C04–10/C06of the orbital
period. The table entries let us solve for the electron velocity
along the elliptical path.
To ﬁgure out the points along the path where the phase
advances by a multiple of 2 p, we rely on the action phase-
integral, ðÞ
pdqÞ=h.W ea s s u m eas i n g l ed e g r e eo ff r e e d o mf o r
the electron as it moves along the ellipse. To get pat time
step tþDt, we use the chain rule. We differentiate Eqs. (1)
and(2)with respect to hand determine dh=dtby differentiating
Eq. (3).T h e n p¼m0ðdh=dtÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
ð½dx=dh/C1382þ½dy=dh/C1382Þq
,a n d
dq¼dhﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð½dx=dh/C1382þ½dy=dh/C1382Þq
. We determine dhby taking
the differences in the table for hðtÞat times tþDtandt.W e
start at the perihelion (the point of closest separation between
the electron and the nucleus) and deﬁne the phase at that point
to be equal to zero. The phase tabulation begins at t¼0. The
electron moves along the elliptical path, and for each new time
step, we record the accumulated phase in an additional column
in the table. We plot the orbit using the x(t)a n d y(t)v a l u e si n
the table and place a red dot at those points where the accumu-
lated phase reaches a multiple of 2 p.
This was done for the n¼4 case as shown in Fig. 3(b).A s
expected, when the electron is moving quickly near the peri-helion, the electron wavelength is smaller than it is when
near the aphelion (the most distant separation between
Fig. 3. (a) Sommerfeld’s orbits for hydrogen in the n¼4 level. Angular momentum of the orbits is 4 h=2p;3h=2p;2h=2p, and h=2p. This image is from
Sommerfeld’s original 1916 paper (Ref. 10); (b) Sommerfeld’s allowed orbits for hydrogen in the n¼4 level. Red dots indicate locations where the electron
phase is a multiple of 2 p. Each arc segment is one electron wavelength. There are four electron wavelengths in the circular orbit and in each of the elliptical
orbits; (c) Sommerfeld’s allowed orbits for hydrogen in the n¼9 level. Angular momentum of the orbits is 9 h=2p;8h=2p;…;2h=2p;h=2p. Red dots indicate
locations where the electron phase is a multiple of 2 p. There are nine electron wavelengths in the circle and in each of the ellipses.
373 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Littman et al. 373 04 October 2023 22:52:10
electron and the nucleus). For n¼4, there are four electron
wavelengths in the circular orbit and in each of the ellipses.
In Fig. 3(c), we have done this also for the n¼9 case.
Here, there are nine electron wavelengths in the circular orbit
and in each of the eight additional ellipses. This family of
orbits will be used to compare with the n¼10 Schr €odinger
wavefunctions.
Now we overlay the scaled n¼9 Bohr–Sommerfeld orbits
on the n¼10 Schr €odinger wavefunctions. We do this for
each of the possible ‘values (leaving out ‘¼0—so
‘¼9;8;…;2;1). The comparisons are for equal values of ‘
and only for the sub-levels that have a maximum projection
of angular momentum on the zaxis. Thus, if we are making
comparisons for the ‘¼9 state, we choose m¼69. If we
are comparing the ‘¼8 state, we choose m¼68 for com-
parison, and so on. In Fig. 4,n¼9 Bohr–Sommerfeld orbits
are overlayed on n¼10 Schr €odinger wavefunctions for four
cases.
Figure 4(a) is the circular state, n¼10;‘¼9;m¼69,
compared to the n¼9 Bohr and Sommerfeld model solution.
The state n¼10;‘¼8;m¼68, shown in Fig. 4(b), dis-
plays several interesting features. It has 8-fold symmetry,
one less than the n¼10;‘¼9;m¼69 state. Along the
radial direction, a second ring of anti-nodes appears. Recall
Sommerfeld’s suggestion of two quantum numbers, nhand
nr—so the reduction of the circumferential symmetry by 1
and the increase in the radial rings by 1 is consistent withSommerfeld’s idea that nhþnr¼n. As we will see for
lower ‘states, as the circumferential symmetry drops by 1,
the ring of radial anti-nodes will increase by 1. Next, we see
that the perihelion of the elliptical orbit aligns with the loca-
tion of the inner ring. This trend will continue with lower ‘
states. Each time a new inner ring is added by decreasing ‘,
the location of the inner-most ring of anti-nodes will match
the location of the perihelion of the elliptical orbit. We see
also that there is rough correspondence with the location of
the positive circumferential anti-nodes with the red dots
along the ellipse.
Note that the overall size of the Schr €odinger n¼10;
‘¼8;m¼68 wavefunction appears larger than the
n¼10;‘¼9;m¼69 wavefunction. This can be seen as
the result of sweeping the ellipse about the nucleus—recallthat the semi-major axis of all of the ellipses and the circle
isn
2a0. According to Bethe and Salpeter,14the average
value of the radius for a Schr €odinger state of angular
momentum ‘isð1=2Þð3n2/C0‘ð‘þ1ÞÞa0. That is, the smaller
‘, the larger the average size of the state—only when ‘isn–
1 does the size of the state approach the classical value of
n2a0. So according to this relationship, the average radius of
Schr €odinger’s n¼10;‘¼9 state is 105 a0(as compared to
100a0), and the radius of the n¼10;‘¼8 state is 114 a0(a
larger value than 105 a0). The expected average radius of the
n¼10;‘¼1 state should be 149 a0(that is, 50% larger than
100a0).
Fig. 4. Sommerfeld orbits for n¼9 (scaled by 100/81) overlayed on contour plots of the Schr €odinger wavefunction for n¼10; (a) ‘¼9;m¼69; (b)
‘¼8;m¼68; (c) ‘¼7;m¼67; (d) ‘¼6;m¼66. Note that as the ‘value decreases, the circumferential symmetry decreases, and the number in radial
rings increases. Note also that the perihelions of the orbits align with the innermost rings of the Schr €odinger wavefunctions. a0is the Bohr radius.
374 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Littman et al. 374 04 October 2023 22:52:10
The next two wavefunctions in the n¼10 sequence are
‘¼7;m¼67, and ‘¼6;m¼66 ,s h o w ni nF i g s . 4(c) and
4(d). These states also match up with the de Broglie-wave-ana-
lyzed orbits. The lower ‘states ð‘¼4;3;2;and 1) continue to
follow these trends—as the ‘value decreases, the circumferen-
tial symmetry decreases, and the number of radial ringsincreases. All this is consistent with Sommerfeld’s hypothesisthatn
hþnr¼n.
One of the reviewers of this paper asked if the correlation
of the de Broglie phase between the Bohr and
Bohr–Sommerfeld models and the actual Schr €odinger wave-
functions is signiﬁcant or merely coincidence? This is agood question worthy of discussion.
We know that classical elliptical orbits have been used
with much success to understand quantum mechanical
behavior of hydrogen and hydrogen-like atoms. For example,
Horbatsch, Hessels, and Horbatsch in their paper entitled,“Classical calculation of the lifetimes and branching ratiosfor radiative decays of hydrogenic atoms,”
15found that they
could accurately estimate quantum mechanical radiative
decay in hydrogen using semi-classical methods for all stateshaving principal quantum numbers nand ‘/C211. They
assumed that each n;‘state had a single well-deﬁned eccen-
tricity that depended on the energy of the state and its angu-
lar momentum. Their agreement for lifetimes was excellent
(<100 parts per million error for ‘/C2130;<0:1% for ‘
/C219;<1% for ‘/C213), and their agreement for branching
ratios was quite reasonable. Their calculation was based onLarmor radiation of a circulating electron in orbit around the
nucleus. This same type of calculation is posed in a question
at the end of Chapter 14 of Jackson’s Classical
Electrodynamics textbook.
16In addition to the study of life-
times and branching ratios, there are other successful studies
using classical orbits to analyze quantum phenomenon in
hydrogen, and recent studies give us conﬁdence that lookingfor elliptical orbits where the eccentricity is well deﬁned issensible and not likely due to coincidence.
However, perhaps the best test is whether the method
works with other sublevels. So, in response to a reviewer’s
query, we examined the wavefunctions for another group ofstates, namely, m¼0 states having ‘¼9;8;…;2;1. We
found that all of the m¼0 wavefunctions follow the same
patterns as the case discussed earlier, but now the patterns liein any plane that contains the zaxis. In the m¼0 case, the
classical Bohr–Sommerfeld orbit used for comparison withthe quantum result will lie in the same z-axis-containing
plane. Since the angular momentum vector is perpendicularto the orbital plane, the projection of the angular momentumalong zis also zero. Shown in Fig. 5are two of these patterns
for the case of ‘¼5. The one on the left is the wavefunction
pattern in the x–yplane for the m¼65 sublevels, and the
one on the right is the wavefunction pattern in the x–zplane
for the m¼0 sublevel. The two are strikingly similar. With
these additional states, we ﬁnd now that 27 of the 100 suble-vels of n¼10 quantum level have patterns of nodes and anti-
nodes that can be explained using these semi-classical ideas.Observe that the charge distributions for the m¼0 case and
them¼65 cases are very different from one another—the
charge distribution of the m¼0 case is a collection of spheri-
cal rings, whereas the charge distributions of the m¼65
cases are planar rings. These are shown in Fig. 6. It is evident
that the semi-classical analysis can help one understandnodal patterns in charge distributions as well as inwavefunctions.
III. ELLIPTICAL ORBITS AND SPHERICAL
STATES—CHARGE DISTRIBUTIONS COMPARED
RADIALLY
Using the method of separation of variables, the
Schr €odinger wavefunction for hydrogen can be factored into
two parts, R
n‘ðrÞandY‘mðh;uÞ. Here, Rn‘ðrÞis the solution
to the hydrogen radial equation. Y‘mðh;uÞare the spherical
harmonics. Because of this factorization, we can determinethe charge probability density distribution as a function of r.
The Schr €odinger radial distribution is given by r
2½Rn‘ðrÞ/C1382.
Our objective in this section is to compare this radial distri-bution to the radial distribution expected for de Broglie-wave-analyzed Bohr–Sommerfeld orbits. We will be able todo this because Sommerfeld’s stability conditions are in two
Fig. 5. Schr €odinger wavefunctions for n¼10 states with ‘¼5. Left is an x–yslice for the m¼65 sublevels, and right is an x–zslice for the m¼0 sublevel.
To facilitate comparison with the image on the left, the x–zslice is rotated 90/C14with the zaxis horizontal. For the m¼0 case, a slice in any plane containing
thezaxis will appear the same. The nodal patterns of these different cases are similar. Both wavefunctions roughly match the size and phases of the overlay ed
n¼9;‘¼5 Bohr-Sommerfeld orbit.
375 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Littman et al. 375 04 October 2023 22:52:10
parts: one that is radial and another that is azimuthal. This
quantum-classical comparison has two aspects. One involvesmatching the amplitude envelope of the quantum probabilitydensity to a classical analysis of the radial probability densityfor Kepler orbits. The other involves matching the phase.
To match the amplitude envelope, we note that the radial
probability density for a classical electron in orbit is propor-tional to 1 =½dr=dt/C138, which for Keplerian orbits is known to be
r=ðpaﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðe
2a2/C0ðr/C0aÞ2Þq
Þ, where eis the eccentricity and a
is the size of the semi-major axis of the ellipse.17,18
Comparisons between the amplitude envelope and the classical
radial probability distribution have been noted by authors inprevious works.17,19,20
To get the de Broglie phase, we apply Sommerfeld’s
radial stability condition:Þ
ðpr=hÞdr¼nr. Here, pris
m0dr=dt. We tabulate r(t) in a Bohr–Sommerfeld orbit in a
manner similar to that in Sec. II, using rðtÞ
¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
½xðtÞ/C1382þ½yðtÞ/C1382q
, where xðhðtÞÞandyðhðtÞÞare given in
Eqs. (1)and(2). We get dr/dtby applying the chain rule,
dr=dt¼ðdr=dhÞðdh=dtÞ, and dr¼½ ðdr=dtÞðdtÞ/C138.dh=dtis
determined by differentiating Eq. (3). Previously with the
phase integral along the ellipse, we noted every time thephase advanced to a multiple of 2 p, but in this case, we will
note the values of rwhere the phase advances to a multiple
ofpbecause we are plotting the probability density rather
than the wavefunction. Note that the method here considersonly the radial path, r, using the differential radial phase of
ðp
r=hÞdr. In contrast, in Sec. II, the method for determining
the phase was based a one-dimensional elliptical path, q,
using the differential electron phase, ðp=hÞdq.
In Fig. 7, the radial charge distribution for the n¼100;
‘¼80 Schr €odinger state is compared to the classical proba-
bility distribution for the n ¼99;‘¼80 Bohr–Sommerfeld
orbit. The classical distribution is the solid black line. Thisﬁgure also has red dots placed at the radii, where the phaseadvances by multiples of p. The semi-classical result helps
one to understand aspects of the quantum result. One sees
that the average amplitude of the oscillatory solutionmatches the classical value. One also sees that the anti-nodesof the oscillatory solution are in reasonable correspondencewith the red dots. We are using the n¼99 Bohr–Sommerfeldorbit for comparison here for the same reasons that we did in
Secs. Iand II. In this case, the n¼99 Bohr–Sommerfeld
orbital size is very close to the n¼100 orbital size, so there
was no need to scale the results as we did previously.
IV. ELLIPTICAL ORBITS AND PARABOLIC
STATES
Sommerfeld used parabolic coordinates for his compari-
sons to the Stark effect. He used the Hamilton–Jacobimethod of separation of variables to develop three quantumstability conditions according to the parabolic coordinate
variables n;g, and /. These stability conditions gave rise to
quantum numbers, n
1,n2, and m. Schr €odinger’s equation can
be analyzed using parabolic coordinates and also using themethod of separation of variables. As pointed out by Betheand Salpeter,
14the form of the perturbation potential for the
electric ﬁeld along the zaxis preserves the method of separa-
tion of variables since the variable zis a linear combination
ofnandg, namely, z¼0:5ðn/C0gÞ. The other variables are
x¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃngpcosð/Þ;y¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃngpsinð/Þ; and /¼arctan ðy=xÞ.
Fig. 6. 3D contour plots of the charge probability density distribution for n¼10,‘¼5 states. Left is the distribution corresponding to m¼65 sublevels, and
right is the distribution corresponding to the m¼0 sublevel.
Fig. 7. The blue line is the Schr €odinger radial charge distribution for quan-
tum level n¼100;‘¼80. The black line is the classical probability distri-
bution as a function of radius for an electron following an n¼99;‘¼80
Bohr-Sommerfeld orbit. The horizontal axis is in atomic units, a0. The red
dots mark the radii according to the de Broglie phase wave idea, where the
phase reaches a multiple of p. The calculation begins at the perihelion with
phase equal to zero. The red dots roughly correlate with the anti-nodes of
the radial charge density. a0is the Bohr radius.
376 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Littman et al. 376 04 October 2023 22:52:10
Parabolic states are used often to analyze the Stark effect in
atomic hydrogen. For a state to have a linear shift in the elec-
tric ﬁeld, it means that in the absence of a ﬁeld, there would
be an electric dipole moment. That is true for parabolic statesbut not for spherical states, which are symmetric or anti-symmetric with respect to inversion. The energy shift of astate with an electric dipole moment is the product of the
electric dipole moment and the external ﬁeld. If the state has
an electric dipole moment in the absence of a ﬁeld, thenapplication of an external ﬁeld leads to a shift that is linearin the ﬁeld—that is what happens in excited atomic
hydrogen.
Figure 8is a contour plot of the charge distribution of a
parabolic state for the quantum level, n¼10 in the x–z
plane. This state has the largest electric dipole moment ofthe 100 sub-levels of n¼10 and the largest linear shift in an
external electric ﬁeld–it also has m¼0. A Bohr–Sommerfeld
ellipse in the x–zplane has its angular momentum vector
along the yaxis and, therefore, would also have m¼0. We
know from Schr €odinger’s analysis that parabolic states do
not have a well-deﬁned angular momentum. Instead, they are
made up of a superposition of multiple angular momentumstates.
19The fractional component is determined by projec-
ting the parabolic state onto spherical states of various values
of‘. One can develop insight about the Schr €odinger result if
we compare a collection of Bohr–Sommerfeld ellipticalorbits to an x–zslice of the Schr €odinger charge distribu-
tion—we could have also used a y–zslice, or any slice that
contains the zaxis—this state has rotational symmetry about
z. In Fig. 8, four Bohr–Sommerfeld orbits having ‘¼1;2;3,
and 4 are overlayed on the quantum charge distribution. Forthese four Bohr–Sommerfeld orbits, the angular momentum
vector points along y. The contours shown are for a slice in
thex–zplane. The red dots appear at multiples of pin phase
along the orbits. You will note that the anti-nodes of the par-abolic state roughly line up with the red dots. We see that thesize and de Broglie phase of the classical elliptical orbit helpone to understand both the oscillations and the amplitude of
the quantum charge density.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Wavefunctions and charge densities for atomic hydrogen
display patterns that are understandable in terms of the plan-
etary models of the old quantum theories. The seeminglycomplex myriad of nodes and anti-nodes of hydrogen arerecognizable in comparison with de Broglie-wave-analyzedBohr–Sommerfeld orbits. One need not dismiss the old quan-tum theories so quickly when teaching or studying quantum
mechanics. Appreciation of physical ideas like the de
Broglie phase wave can help students look for features inquantum solutions that trigger their imagination. How mighta classical orbiting electron behave? If the wavefunction orthe charge distribution is rapidly changing in space, then theclassical interpretation is that the electron is moving quickly.Schr €odinger’s 1926 paper in the Physical Review
9reminds
us of how important classical mechanics and de Broglie’s
ideas were in his developing wave mechanics. He started offhis paper as follows: “The theory which is reported in thefollowing pages is based on the very interesting and funda-mental researches of L. de Broglie on what he called ‘phasewave’ (‘ondes de phase’) and thought to be associated with
the motion of material points, especially with the motion of
an electron or proton. The point of view taken here, whichwas ﬁrst published in a series of German papers, is ratherthat material points consist of, or are nothing but, wave-systems.” Schr €odinger was inspired by classical motion and
the phase waves of de Broglie. So, too, can these ideas helpthe beginning student see the connections between quantum
solutions and classical ideas and help the student to develop
an understanding of why quantum wavefunctions and chargedistributions look the way they do.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Marko Horbatsch of York University
for helpful discussions. The authors are also grateful to thereviewers for useful suggestions and corrections.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)Electronic mail: mlittman@princeton.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-8407-
8053.
b)Present address: Physics and Computer Science, Cornell University,Ithaca, NY 14850, ORCID: 0000-0002-9847-0232.
c)Present address: Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,ORCID: 0000-0003-1019-8375.
d)Present address: Terra Global Capital, LLC, Oakland, CA 94611.
1N. Bohr, “On the constitution of atoms and molecules,” Philos. Mag.
6(26), 1–25 (1913).
2J. R. Rydberg, “On the structure of the line-spectra of the chemical elements,”
London, Edinburgh, Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci. 29(179), 331–337 (1890).
3M. Planck, “Ueber das gesetz der energieverteilung im normalspectrum
[On the law of distribution of energy in the normal spectrum],” Ann. Phys.
309(3), 553–563 (1901).
4Bohr’s 1913 paper (Ref. 1) uses the CGS form of Coulomb’s law.
Coulomb’s constant, 1 =ð4pe0Þ, does not appear. We have added this con-
stant in the text even though it does not appear explicitly in Bohr’s formu-
lation. This assures that the formula listed in the text is correctly stated in
SI and CGS systems.
Fig. 8. x–zslice of the charge distribution for an n¼10 parabolic state
ðn1¼9;n2¼0;m¼0Þoverlayed with a scaled (100/81) group of n¼9
Bohr–Sommerfeld orbits having ‘¼1;2;3, and 4. The angular momentum
of all these orbits lies along the yaxis. This state has the largest electric
dipole moment of all of the n¼10 sub-levels; Here, the cycle-averaged cen-
ter of the electric charge is far to the right of the nucleus. The dots indicate
the locations, where the de Broglie phase advances by p. Note that dots
roughly align with the anti-nodes of the charge distribution. This state has
rotational symmetry about the zaxis, so a slice in any plane that includes the
zaxis will give the same charge distribution.
377 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Littman et al. 377 04 October 2023 22:52:10
5L. de Broglie, “Recherches sur la theorie des quanta,” Ann. Phys. 3(10),
22–128 (1925).
6R. G. Hulet and D. Kleppner, “Rydberg atoms in circular states,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 51, 1430–1433 (1983).
7R. Karam, “Why are complex numbers needed in quantum mechanics?
Some answers for the introductory level,” Am. J. Phys. 88(39), 39–45
(2020).
8K. W. Ford, “Niels Bohr’s ﬁrst 1913 paper: Still relevant, still exciting,still puzzling,” Phys. Teach. 56, 500–502 (2018).
9E. Schr €odinger, “An undulatory theory of mechanics of atoms and mole-
cules,” Phys. Rev. 28(6), 1049–1070 (1926).
10A. Sommerfeld, “Zur quantentheorie der spektrallinien,” Ann. Phys. 51,
1–94 (1916).
11A. Sommerfeld, Atombau und Spektrallinien (Freidrich Vieweg und Sohn,
Braunschweig, 1919); translation by H. L. Brose, Atomic Structure and
Spectral Lines (Methuen, London, 1923).
12T. Deeney and C. O. O’Sullivan, “Sommerfeld’s elliptical atomic orbitals
revisited - A useful preliminary to the study of quantum mechanics,” Am.
J. Phys. 82(9), 883–886 (2014).13J. Arnold, “The convergence of semi-classical and quantum mechanics:
Examining atomic radiation through the lens of the correspondence
principle,” Undergraduate thesis, Princeton University, 2020.
14H. A. Bethe and E. E. Salpeter, Quantum Mechanics of One and Two
Electron Atoms (Springer, Berlin, 1957).
15M. W. Horbatsch, E. A. Hessels, and M. Horbatsch, “Classical calculation
of the lifetimes and branching ratios for radiative decays of hydrogenic
atoms,” Phys. Rev. A 71, 020501-R (2005).
16J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics , 3rd ed. (Wiley, New York,
1999), ISBN: 0-471-30932-X, problems 14.21 and 14.22.
17A. Martin-Ruiz, J. Bernal, A. Frank, and A. Carbajal-Dominguez, “The
classical limit of the quantum Kepler problem,” J. Mod. Phys. 4(6),
818–822 (2013).
18D. Savransky, E. Cady, and N. J. Kasdin, “Parameter distributions ofKeplerian orbits,” Ast. Jour. 728, 66–72 (2013).
19D. Kleppner, M. Littman, and M. Zimmerman, “Highly excited atoms,”
Sci. Am. 244(5), 130–149 (1981).
20E. G. P. Rowe, “The classical limit of quantum mechanical hydrogen
radial distributions,” Eur. J. Phys. 8, 81–87 (1987).
378 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Littman et al. 378 04 October 2023 22:52:10
