
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkCOMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS| JUNE 01 2022
Introducing simple models of social systems 
Pablo Jensen
Am. J. Phys.  90, 462–468 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0086028
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
The coef ficient of restitution for collisions of happy balls, unhappy balls, and tennis balls
American Journal of Physics  (November 2000)
Happy Balls, Unhappy Balls, and Newton's Cradle
The Physics T eacher  (March 2010)
A formal method for categorizing unhappy users in social network using novel sentimental direct and in-
direct feedback comparing logistic regression over random forest
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023) 04 October 2023 23:11:08
COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS
The Computational Physics Section publishes articles that help students and instructors learn about the com-
putational tools used in contemporary research. Interested authors are encouraged to send a proposal to theeditors of the Section, Jan Tobochnik (jant@kzoo.edu) or Harvey Gould (hgould@clarku.edu). Summarize
the physics and the algorithm you wish to discuss and how the material would be accessible to advanced
undergraduates or beginning graduate students.
Introducing simple models of social systems
Pablo Jensena)
Laboratoire de Physique, Institut Rh ^onalpin des Systemes Complexes, IXXI, Universit /C19e de Lyon, ENS de Lyon,
UCB Lyon 1, CNRS, F-69342 Lyon, France
(Received 21 January 2022; accepted 16 February 2022)
Learning to model social systems can foster critical thinking about the applications of
mathematical methods to social issues and also lead to professional opportunities. I introduce an
intriguing simple model proposed by Thomas Schelling to understand urban segregation. It shows
that even when individual agents seek mixed neighborhoods, they can collectively create asegregated city that makes everyone unhappy. The model can be presented as a simple role-playing
game or by a computer program. At a more advanced level, the methods of statistical physics
provide a way to calculate equilibrium states corresponding to segregated conﬁgurations. I alsodiscuss why physics inspired models have difﬁculties in understanding the complex dynamics of
real social systems.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0086028
I. INTRODUCTION
Many physicists have contributed to the emerging ﬁeld of
computational social science1by studying simple models of
social systems (for reviews, see Refs. 2–4). Social networks
and digital devices provide trajectories that leave digitaltrails, just as particles in a bubble chamber leave trails oftheir trajectories, creating an abundance of data that form thebasis for mathematical approaches to social systems. Social
modeling is also an essential component of the work by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Integratedassessment models
5try to understand how human behavior
inﬂuences climate change and how to reduce emissions in anefﬁcient way. Teaching about simple social models, both atthe undergraduate and graduate levels, helps develop intui-
tion about social systems and fosters critical thinking about
their analysis by formal methods.
In this paper, I discuss an intriguing and popular model
proposed by the economist Thomas Schelling in the late1960s and then widely studied by scientists from manyﬁelds, including physicists. As discussed in Sec. II,
Schelling’s segregation model
6shows that even when indi-
vidual agents seek mixed neighborhoods, they can, collec-tively, end up creating a segregated city that makes everyoneunhappy. In Sec. III, I present two ways of introducing the
model, starting with a simple role-playing game in which
students directly experience the increase in segregation as
they individually aim at a more mixed neighborhood. Thesecond approach is a simulation that helps explore andunderstand the model’s main features in a systematic way.Section IVexplains how statistical physics can go beyond
simulations to calculate the equilibrium states corresponding
to segregated conﬁgurations. In the ﬁnal epistemological sec-
tion, I argue that, although simple models are useful forphysical systems, their usefulness is more limited for social
systems. In short, they might be useful for improving our
thinking and intuition, but they do not help answer many
questions about real social systems, because social systemscannot be meaningfully manipulated in laboratories.
II. THE SCHELLING SEGREGATION MODEL
At the end of the 1960s, Thomas Schelling addressed an
important question: How can we explain “segregation by
color” in the United States? Our intuition suggests that the
overall state of a city reﬂects the characteristics of individu-
als. If people wanted to live in mixed environments, neigh-
borhoods should spontaneously bring together people of
different types. Instead, Schelling argued that “the interplay
of individual choices […] is a complex system with collec-tive results that bear no close relation to individual intent.”
Perhaps an overall segregated state could be achieved by
individuals seeking diversity.
To test his intuition, he modeled the city as a chessboard
with each square representing a dwelling, which can be
occupied by a red or green agent or be empty. Each day, an
agent is chosen at random and is offered a random empty
dwelling. The agent calculates whether this movementincreases its satisfaction. If it does, it moves; if not, it stays
put. Then, another agent and another empty square are cho-
sen at random, and the process is repeated.
To complete the creation of this virtual city, we need to
specify how the agent’s satisfaction (or utility in economists’
jargon) depends on the color composition of its neighbor-
hood. For computational simplicity, Schelling chose an ele-
mentary satisfaction function, equal to zero up to a thresholdconcentration of opposite-color neighbors, and equal to one
above. I choose here utility functions leading agents to
462 Am. J. Phys. 90(6), June 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 462 04 October 2023 23:11:08
strictly prefer mixed neighborhoods with as many reds as
greens to segregated ones, making the result more striking aswe will ﬁnd in the following. A simple example is given in
Fig.1. (A more complex is studied in Sec. IV C.)
Our intuition tells us that, because individuals move to
improve their satisfaction, and satisfaction is highest whenneighborhoods are mixed, the city should approach mixing.
The appeal of this virtual city is that it shows that this intui-
tion is incorrect, and that the dynamics leads to a segregatedcity, where most inhabitants are dissatisﬁed (see Fig. 2). I
suggest that readers stop here and take a moment to under-
stand the origin of the apparent paradoxical result before I
provide an explanation.
The explanation of the paradox is that when an agent chooses
to move, it takes into account only the change of its own satis-
faction. Thus, when a red agent leaves a predominantly green
neighborhood to move to a mixed one, thereby increasing itsown utility, it penalizes all its former nei ghbors (greens or reds),
because the former place is now more dominated by greens. Its
new neighbors are also unhappy, because their neighborhood isnow slightly red. The overall utility decreases, because the
losses of these many agents (old and new neighbors) are not
compensated by the gain made by the mover. Because thedynamics is governed by “selﬁsh” individuals, this particular
gain inexorably leads to a situation where everyone is unhappy.
Note that segregation is not observed when the utility func-
tion is symmetric, for example, by setting uðqÞ¼0f o r q
/C21q
2¼0:65 in Fig. 1. However, symmetry means that agents
do not “see” the color of other agents (because it plays no role
in their worldview, i.e., their utility function), which makesany analogy with racial segregation questionable.III. IMPLEMENTING THE SCHELLING MODEL
A. A simple role-playing game
A striking way to understand Schelling’s model is to
implement it in the classroom. The class is divided into two
groups, each wearing sports’ bibs or clothes of the same
color. Chairs are then placed in rows to form a square or a
rectangle. Students are assigned random seats to start and
then the teacher chooses a student and an empty chair ran-
domly, either intuitively or by using dice or a simple random
number generator. The student then calculates his/her change
in satisfaction and decides whether to move to the empty
chair or not. When the utility is identical at both the initial
and suggested locations, the student can either choose to stay
or to move. I recommend using a simple satisfaction function
with only three levels, as in Fig. 1. For example, if the clos-
est four neighbors are taken into account to compute the util-
ity, it is 0 when there is either zero or one student of the
same color in the neighborhood, 1/2 when there are strictly
more than two, and 1 when there are exactly two. These
numbers have to be proportionally adapted for seats on the
square borders, which have fewer neighbors, when there are
empty chairs in the neighborhood of the student, and whenthe teacher includes the closest eight neighbors (instead of
four) to calculate the satisfaction. The details do not change
the ﬁnal segregated state. In practice, the minimal size for a
meaningful game is a 5 /C25 square (for about 20 students and
ﬁve empty chairs).
As students move and see others become their neighbors or
leave, they will realize that, even when each of them prefers
mixed neighborhoods, they collectively reach a segregated
Fig. 1. (Color online) (a) A simple utility function given by uðqÞ¼0i fq/C20q1¼0:35;uðqÞ¼1=2i fq/C21q2¼0:65, and uðqÞ¼1i fq1/C20q/C20q2, where qis
the proportion of same color neighbors. (b) For this utility function, the green (light) agent in the center has maximum satisfaction in the left conﬁg uration
(mixed neighborhood), low satisfaction in the middle conﬁguration (neighborhood entirely of its color), and zero satisfaction in the right conﬁgur ation (neigh-
borhood entirely of the other color). Neighborhoods can be deﬁned by the closest four agents (top, down, left, right) or by the eight closest agents (ad ding the
four agents along the diagonals). In the examples in the ﬁgure, both deﬁnitions of the neighborhood lead to the same satisfaction.
Fig. 2. (Color online) The inhabitants are initially randomly distributed in the different squares. As they move to increase their satisfaction, the colors separate
and the city ends up being totally segregated. I use periodic boundary conditions and the utility function described in Sec. IV C and Fig. 5.
463 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 Pablo Jensen 463 04 October 2023 23:11:08
conﬁguration, where most are unhappy, because they end up
being surrounded by too many students wearing the same
color. The personal experience of decreasing satisfaction as
students wearing the same color leave their neighborhood
when it is not mixed enough, to join a more balanced place,
helps students understand the origin of the apparent paradox,which is difﬁcult to understand, even for experienced scien-
tists, when they are shown only simulation results.
B. A NetLogo simulation program
NetLog is a free, simple, and popular multi-agent pro-
grammable modeling environment, which runs on almost
any current computer.7I provide a program8to simulate the
Schelling model to explore different dynamics as a function
of the model parameters, either for large or small systems
(see Figs. 2and3). The graphical interface allows users to
vary the initial conﬁguration and the model parameters: sat-
isfaction functions, city size, proportion of empty slots,
neighborhood size, percentage of green/red agents, initial
conﬁguration, and temperature (see Sec. IV). It also displays
the evolution of the average utility and a quantitative segre-gation indicator.
IV. SOLVING SCHELLING’S SEGREGATION
MODEL
To check the robustness and generality of the results, it is
important to go beyond the simulations and show that segre-
gation is the stable stationary conﬁguration. Statistical phys-
ics provides the tools to ﬁnd the global equilibrium state and
to calculate the probabilities of different conﬁgurations such
as those in Fig. 2.9
Two ideas are needed to connect the microscopic and
macroscopic levels. The ﬁrst is the addition of noise in the
decision rule for moving to avoid being blocked inuninteresting states, because no agent can ﬁnd a location that
strictly improves its satisfaction. This noise is interpreted as
a temperature in physics, and in economics, as the effect of
features that are not explicitly included in the utility func-tion, but that still affect the decision to move in real settings
(for example, urban facilities and friends).
10The second idea
is to introduce bounded neighborhoods (Fig. 4), that is, non-
overlapping city blocks such that each block can be treated
as a single entity with a utility function that depends on the
number of each type of agent within the block.9The bounded
neighborhoods provide a means for building a city state
function as a sum of individual block functions, which
depend only on the number of agents in each block. In thefollowing, I summarize the nature of the analytical solution
to the Schelling model for the case of agents of a single color
(vacant cells play the role of the other color) with a speciﬁcform of the utility function. I refer the reader to Refs. 9and
11for a more detailed solution of the general case of a two-
color population with arbitrary utility functions, for which
the approach is similar but more cumbersome.
A. Defining the city: Agents and utility function
The city is divided into Qnon-overlapping blocks, each
containing Hlocations or cells (see Fig. 4). A microscopic
city conﬁguration is given by the occupation status of eachof the HQlocations. The city can also be described at a
coarse-grained level, by giving the number of agents n
q(or
the density qq¼nq=H/C201) in each block q(q¼1…Q).
The total number of agents is conserved so that
Q/C01PQ
q¼1qq¼q0. I assume that all agents share the same
utility function uðqÞ. Thus, the utility within a block q
depends only on the density of the agents qqin that block.
The total utility is given by U¼HP
qqquðqqÞ. Note that
coarse-grained conﬁgurations are degenerate, because for a
Fig. 3. (Color online) Screen capture of Netlogo’s program display. The utility functions given in Fig. 1and used in Sec. III A are shown on the left. A descrip-
tion of the different parameters is given in the Information tab of the program.
464 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 Pablo Jensen 464 04 October 2023 23:11:08
given value of qq>0, there are many different microscopic
conﬁgurations.
At each iteration, an agent and a vacant cell in another
block are chosen at random. The agent moves into this emptycell with probability
PðDuÞ¼1
1þe/C0Du=T; (1)
where Duis the change in the utility if the chosen agent
moves and Tis the temperature. In this way, the set fqqg
varies as the system evolves.
B. Finding the stationary state
I now show how to ﬁnd the stationary probability distribu-
tionPðxÞof the microscopic conﬁguration x. We know from
statistical physics12that if there exists a state function L(x)
that governs the transition probabilities PðDuÞ, then the
dynamics satisﬁes detailed balance and the distribution ofthe stationary probability distribution PðxÞis given by
PðxÞ¼1
ZeFðxÞ=T; (2)
where Zis the partition function, FðxÞ¼LðxÞþTSðxÞ, and
the entropy Sfor large His given by the standard expression
SðxÞ¼HX
qsðqqÞ; (3)
with
sðqÞ¼/C0 qlnq/C0ð1/C0qÞlnð1/C0qÞ: (4)
The key to solving the Schelling model is to deﬁne a link
function L(x) such that Du¼DL, thereby linking individual
behavior ( Du) to collective behavior ( DL). It is simple to
check that, for bounded neighborhoods,
LðxÞ¼HX
q‘q; (5)with
‘q¼XNq
nq¼0uðnq=HÞ (6)
satisﬁes the condition Du¼DL.13Lmay be interpreted as
the cumulative effect of the individual utilities gained by
agents as they progressively enter the city from a reservoir atu¼0. An analogy can be drawn between Land the energy of
a capacitor that is progressively charged from q¼0 to some
q¼Q, because the energy required to increase its charge
increases as qincreases. Here, the utility gained by an agent
entering the city increases as the city ﬁlls up ( u>0, by
deﬁnition).
In this interpretation, segregation arises because agents do
not collectively maximize their total satisfaction Ubut the
state function F. This state function generalizes the concept
of free energy to systems driven by individual dynamics.
In the continuous limit of large H,‘
qbecomes
‘ðqÞ¼ðq
0uðq0Þdq0: (7)
AsT!0, the probability PðxÞis dominated by the conﬁgu-
rations that maximize the sumP
q‘ðqqÞunder the constraint
of a ﬁxed q0¼Q/C01PQ
q¼1qq. To perform this maximization,
we can follow methods used to study phase transitions (such
as liquid-vapor coexistence12). The point is whether the
stationary state is homogeneous or inhomogeneous. Thehomogeneous state at density q
0is unstable against phase
separation if there exist two densities q1and q2such that
cfðq1Þþð 1/C0cÞfðq2Þ>fðq0Þ. The parameter c(0<c<1)
corresponds to the fraction of blocks with density q1in the
two phase state with a fraction 1 /C0chaving density q2.
C. Results for a specific utility function
To focus on the effects of the agents’ utilities and not on
entropic contributions, I now solve the model in the limit
T!0. I also set q0¼1=2 so that the optimal equilibrium
Fig. 4. City composed of Q¼36 blocks each containing H¼100 cells with q0¼1=2. (a) Mixed state: Agents are distributed homogeneously between the
blocks, qq¼1=2 for all q. (b) Segregated conﬁguration: Agents are positioned on 22 blocks with mean density q¼0:82; the other blocks are empty. Note that
(b) is a metastable state and not the stable equilibrium predicted by statistical physics, which is 36 =ﬃﬃﬃ
3p
’21 blocks with density q¼0:86 (see Sec. IV C).
465 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 Pablo Jensen 465 04 October 2023 23:11:08
qq¼1=2 for all blocks can be reached using the triangular
utility function given in Fig. 5.
By elementary integration, we ﬁnd
‘ðqÞ¼q2ðq/C201=2Þ
1
2q2þ3
2q/C03
8ðq/C211=2Þ:8
><
>:(8)
For a segregated state with Nsblocks of density qs>1=2,
(Q/C0Ns) empty blocks, and the constraint qsNs=Q¼q0
¼1=2, we ﬁnd that the maximum value of the link function
LðqsÞ¼Ns‘ðqsÞis reached for a segregated state with
density qs;max¼ﬃﬃﬃ
3p
=2’0:87>1=2, and Ns;max=Q¼1=
ð2qs;maxÞ¼1=ﬃﬃﬃ
3p
’0:58. For this density, the normalized
(per agent) link function L/C3value is
L/C3
max¼Lmax=ðq0HQÞ¼2ls;maxNs;max
Q
¼ﬃﬃﬃ
3p
2ﬃﬃﬃ
3p
/C01/C0/C1
’0:63: (9)
Readers can check that this value is higher than that
obtained for any conﬁguration with Nblocks of density
q/C211=2 and ( Q–N) empty blocks, including the mixed con-
ﬁguration ( q¼1=2;N¼Q), for which L/C3
mixed¼1=2. Thus,
the system will evolve to a segregated state and not to themixed conﬁguration that maximizes the global utility. The
mixed equilibrium state is unstable because at T>0, there is
a nonzero probability that an agent accepts a slight decreasein its utility and moves to another block with densityq¼1=2. Agents remaining in their former blocks now have
a lower utility and are more likely to leave, which empties
the block, because each move away further decreases the
utility of the remaining agents.
Using simulations to ﬁnd the stable ( q
s;max) equilibrium of
the block Schelling model is tricky, because segregatedstates with Nblocks of density q>1=2;q6¼q
s;maxare
metastable with high activation barriers to move to the state
N61, reﬂecting the difﬁculty of emptying or ﬁlling an entire
block. (An example of such a metastable state is given inFig. 4(b).) States that contain a block with q<1=2 are
unstable.V. SIMPLE MODELS AND SOCIAL COMPLEXITY
Due to its simplicity, the Schelling model provides a use-
ful introduction to the modeling of social systems for physics
students. After 15 years of teaching this topic to pre-
doctorate students, I found that it is also important to havethem realize that physicists’ tools may not be adapted to the
modeling of real social systems. I focus here on two main
reasons and refer readers to Refs. 14and15for a further
discussion.
Traditional applications of statistical physics are based on
a simple idea: Each particle can be characterized by a set of
characteristics that remain unchanged in different situations.
This assumption is fruitful, because nuclei are not affectedby chemical reactions, and the same particles can collec-tively form a gas, a liquid, or a solid, depending on an exter-
nal parameter such as the temperature. Physicists are
tempted to consider that the statistical physics approach tosocial behavior means trying to “understand regularities at
large scale as collective effects of the interaction among sin-
gle individuals, considered as relatively simple entities.”
2
However, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd “stable nuclei” for humans.When we try to derive internal characteristics from observed
behaviors, we ﬁnd that these characteristics depend on the
context used to interpret the behavior.
15Also, as social sci-
entists have understood long ago, humans care about how
we model them, and their behavior may change in response
to model results. For example, Wilke and Bergstrom arguethat when models suggest that an epidemic is likely to endsoon, onerous control measures feel like overkill, people
relax, and the epidemic persists.
16Social systems also lack
global conservation laws (energy and momentum) that areso helpful for their physical counterparts. For example,
atmospheric models have a huge number of degrees of free-
dom and are difﬁcult to model. Nevertheless, weather andclimate models have proven reliable, thanks in part to theuse of conservation laws. Lacking such conservation laws,
models of social systems are unable to predict much of
social dynamics. Indeed, complex economic models that tryto predict economic growth fare no better than a much sim-
pler model: growth of next year will be the same as this
year’s.
17
Another problem makes social systems difﬁcult to model:
The dependence of effects of a given cause on the context.For example, the price of an apartment may rise or decrease
when it is one ﬂoor higher. When there is an elevator, the
price is likely to increase if the apartment is brighter, but ifthere is not an elevator, the price likely decreases because of
the additional effort required to climb the stairs. This depen-
dence can be compared to nonlinear effects, which alsomake some physical systems difﬁcult to understand.
In addition, physics has progressed by transforming its
objects in the laboratory.
18,19Galileo minimized friction
because he could not describe it mathematically, and materi-
als were made as pure crystals before quantum physics coulddescribe them.
20The need for simpliﬁcation suggests that for
physicists’ models to become relevant for social systems,
human behavior would have to be simpliﬁed. The value ofsimpliﬁcation is conﬁrmed by the usefulness of physicists’tools for the case of pedestrian and trafﬁc ﬂows,
21where our
actions are strongly channeled by social constraints.
However, going further in the taming of people would needcollective approval in democratic societies.
Fig. 5. (Color online) Asymmetrically peaked individual utility as a function
of the block density q. The utility is deﬁned as uðqÞ¼2qifq/C201=2 and
uðqÞ¼3=2/C0qifq>1=2. Agents strictly prefer half-ﬁlled neighborhoods
(q¼1=2). They also prefer overcrowded ( q¼1) neighborhoods to empty
ones ( q¼0).
466 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 Pablo Jensen 466 04 October 2023 23:11:08
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Our intuition suggests that the observation of a segregated
city implies that its dwellers actively seek it. By formalizingthis idea, the Schelling model allows us to understand that
we can end up with segregated conﬁgurations even when all
individuals are looking for diversity. The same global state isreached when individuals seek segregation. Therefore,observing a global segregated state does not allow us todeduce anything about individual preferences.
22
The small number of assumptions makes this model of
much interest. We can understand the results and the causali-ties at work in depth without being overwhelmed by thecomplexity of the real world: Selﬁshness leads to unfavor-
able situations because individuals make decisions without
considering the wishes of their neighbors, old and new. Wecan study these effects in detail and show why they are, onaverage, stronger than the speciﬁc utility obtained by themover, leading to an overall negative effect. The applicationof statistical physics to the model improves our understand-ing by calculating its stationary states.
Models inspired from physics can expand the conceptual
toolbox of other disciplines. For example, analogies between
economic systems and the random ﬁeld Ising model have
suggested that large ﬂuctuations of the economy (such asstock exchange price jumps) can arise from endogenousdynamics, and not only from external shocks, as assumed bymost economic models.
3However, most physical models
need to be adapted to respect the speciﬁcity of the system ofinterest. For example, pedestrians do not always behave as
granular matter, as initially assumed by many physicists,23
and geographical space is not homogeneous.24Moreover,
successful interdisciplinary collaborations need time: it hastaken decades for physicists to build meaningful epidemio-logical models and achieve recognition for their importantcontributions.
25
The difﬁculties of social models inspired from physics do
not mean that it is impossible to conceptualize or to quantifyhuman collective behaviors. Statistical tools or quantitative
indicators are essential to improve public knowledge (is
unemployment rising?), or to make appropriate decisions(how efﬁcient are vaccines?). The key point is to ﬁnd con-ceptualizations that are relevant for human societies.
26
VII. SUGGESTED PROBLEMS
The Schelling model provides many further avenues for
exploration. I list them from the easiest to the most difﬁcult.
(1) Explore the effects of changing the utility function to
check the importance of the agents’ preferences forunmixed neighborhoods of their own color (see the dis-cussion on the symmetry of the utility function at the endof Sec. II).
(2) An optimal result (a mixed city) can be reached by forc-
ing movers to pay a tax proportional to the utility change
they impose on their neighbors.
9To incorporate the
effects of a tax, we can write the probability of a moveas
PðDCÞ¼1
1þe/C0DC=T; (10)
whereDC¼DuþaðDU/C0DuÞ;Duis the change of the
agent’s own utility, and DUis the change of the totalutility. The parameter 0 /C20a/C201 weights the contribu-
tion of the other agents’ utility variation in the calcula-tion of the cost Cand can be interpreted as a degree of
cooperativity (or altruism). For a¼0, the probability of
a move depends only on the selﬁsh interest of the chosenagent, and when a¼1, it depends only on the collective
utility. Compute the total satisfaction as a function of a
to interpolate between the two limiting behaviors of indi-
vidual and collective dynamics.
(3) Explore the role of temperature. This variable is already
implemented in the NetLogo program and can also betreated analytically. Show that noise makes the segre-gated phase disappear for T>1=2.
(4) Mix two kinds of agents (selﬁsh and altruist) to explore
how rapidly the system goes beyond the reach of analyti-cal tools and shows “compositional chaos.”
27Write a
simulation program and measure the evolution of theaverage agent utility in the stationary state as a functionof the proportion of altruists. Show that even an inﬁnites-imal proportion of altruists has dramatic effects on theaverage agent utility.
a)Electronic mail: pablo.jensen@ens-lyon.fr, ORCID: 0000-0001-9912-
2849.
1D. Lazer et al., “Computational social science,” Science 323, 721–723 (2009).
2C. Castellano, S. Fortunato, and V. Loreto, “Statistical physics of social
dynamics,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 591–646 (2009).
3J. Ph. Bouchaud, “Crises and collective socio-economic phenomena:
Simple models and challenges,” J. Stat. Phys. 151, 567–606 (2013).
4J. Ph. Bouchaud and J. P. Nadal (eds.), Special Issue on “From statistical
physics to social sciences,” C. Phys. 20(4), 241–386 (2019).
5An introduction to Integrated Assessment Models can be found <https://
www.carbonbrief.org/qa-how-integrated-assessment-models-are-used-to-study-climate-change >.
6T. C. Schelling, “Dynamic models of segregation,” J. Math. Sociol. 1,
143–186 (1971).
7NetLogo website <http://ccl.northwestern.edu/netlogo/ >.
8See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/10.1119/
5.0086028 for the program, and it runs smoothly with NetLogo-4.1.3
version.
9S. Grauwin, E. Bertin, R. Lemoy, and P. Jensen, “Competition betweencollective and individual dynamics,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106,
20622–20626 (2009).
10D. McFadden, “Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior,”
Front. Economet. 76, 689–708 (1974).
11S. Grauwin, F. Goffette-Nagot, and P. Jensen in, “Dynamic models of resi-
dential segregation: An analytical solution,” J. Public Econ. 96, 124–141
(2012).
12H. Callen, Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics (John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1985); M. Evans and T. Hanney,
“Nonequilibrium statistical mechanics of the zero-range process and
related models,” J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 38, R195–R240 (2005); Lectures
by Miranda Holmes-Cerfon, available at <https://cims.nyu.edu/ /C24holmes/
teaching/asa19/ >, accessed on March 1, 2022 are useful for understanding
Markov chains.
13Grauwin et al. have demonstrated (Ref. 11) that a potential function exists
in the continuous neighborhood case only for very speciﬁc (linear) utility
functions. The key analytical advantage of blocks is that the neighbors ofan agent’s neighbors are also its own neighbors.
14M. Buchanan, The Social Atom: Why the Rich Get Richer, Cheaters Get
Caught, and Your Neighbor Usually Looks like You (Bloomsbury, London,
2007); D. Watts, Everything is Obvious: Once You Know the Answer
(Crown, New York, 2011); N. Silver, The Signal and the Noise (Penguin,
London, 2012).
15P. Jensen, Your Life in Numbers: Modeling Society through Data
(Springer, Berlin, 2021).
16C. O. Wilke and C. T. Bergstrom, “Predicting an epidemic trajectory isdifﬁcult,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 117, 28549–28551 (2020).
467 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 Pablo Jensen 467 04 October 2023 23:11:08
17T. Jobert and L. Persyn, “Quelques constats sur les previsions conjonctur-
elles de la croissance francaise,” Rev. Econ. Polit. 122, 833–849 (2012).
18A. Pickering, The Mangle of Practice (University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 1995); B. Latour, “The ‘Topoﬁl’ of Boa Vista—A photo-philosophical montage,” Common Knowl. 4, 145–187 (1995).
19P. Jensen, “An ontology for physicists’ laboratory life,” in Reset Modernity! ,
edited by B. Latour and C. Leclercq (MIT Press, Cambridge, 2016).
20L. Hoddeson, E. Braun, and J. Teichmann, Out of the Crystal Maze:
Chapters from the History of Solid-State Physics (Oxford U. P., Oxford,
1992).
21D. Helbing, “Trafﬁc and related self-driven many-particle systems,” Rev.
Mod. Phys. 73, 1067–1141 (2001).
22T. C. Schelling, Micromotives and Macrobehavior (Norton, New York,
1978). Note that these individual models neglect structural effects, such as
explicitly racial zoning ordinances. See, for example, R. Rothstein, TheColor of Law. A Forgotten History of How Our Government Segregated
America (Liveright, New York, 2017).
23M. Moussa €ıd, D. Helbing, and G. Theraulaz, “How simple rules determine
pedestrian behavior and crowd disasters,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
108, 6884–6888 (2011).
24P. Jensen, “Network-based predictions of retail store commercial catego-
ries and optimal locations,” Phys Rev E 74, R035101 (2006).
25As illustrated by the long-standing commitment of Alex Vespignani and
Vittoria Colizza in modeling epidemics. See, for example, A. Vespignani,
H. Tian, C. Dye et al. , “Modelling COVID-19,” Nat. Rev. Phys. 2,
279–281 (2020).
26J. Dewey, The Public and Its Problems: An Essay in Political Inquiry
(Pennsylvania State U. P., Pennsylvania, 2012).
27P. Jensen, T. Matreux, J. Cambe et al. , “Giant catalytic effect of altruists
in Schelling’s segregation model,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 208301 (2018).
468 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 6, June 2022 Pablo Jensen 468 04 October 2023 23:11:08
