
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkFEBRUARY 01 2023
Invariants: Finding constancy in a sea of change 
Sanjoy Mahajan
Am. J. Phys.  91, 87–89 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0139569
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Observational Derivation of Einstein’ s “Law of the Constancy of the V elocity of Light in Vacuo ”
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2006)
Auditory color constancy
J Acoust Soc Am  (October 2003)
Speech perception in early infancy: perceptual constancy for the vowel categories /a/ and / ⊃ /
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005) 04 October 2023 22:49:08
BACK OF THE ENVELOPE
Invariants: Finding constancy in a sea of change
Sanjoy Mahajana)
Mathematics Department, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
(Received 21 December 2022; accepted 21 December 2022)
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0139569
It is a belief mostly unquestioned that an envelope back
beﬁts only approximate methods, such as lumping or easy
cases. But an envelope back can also ﬁt exact methods of
elegance, such as invariance. An invariant is a quantityremaining ﬁxed despite a seemingly important changethat the invariance shows to have been superﬁcial. Forexample, a dimensionless group—say, GM
sun=rc2in general
relativity—is, in its numerical value, independent of our
superﬁcial choice of unit system.
Let’s try invariance on a classic solitaire problem. From
an 8/C28 game board, cut out two diagonally opposite cor-
ners (Fig. 1(a)).Using 31 2 /C21 domino tiles, can we tile this
board (covering all 62 squares without any tiles
overlapping)?1
My program managed to place 30 tiles but backed itself
into a corner at the ornery last tile (Fig. 1(b)). It used the fol-
lowing procedure:
(1) Find the left uppermost empty square. If no square is
empty, you’ve won and are done.
(2) If possible, on the empty square place a tile oriented with
its other square to the right or downward (choosing ran-
domly if both orientations are possible).
(3) If placing a tile is impossible, you’re stuck. Launch all
the tiles into the air in frustration to start with a freshboard and psyche.
(4) Go to step 1.
Over 100,000 attempts later, it still hadn’t found a
solution.
An alternative approach is suggested by an easier case:
playing tile solitaire on a full chessboard (using 32 domi-
noes). Tiling it is easy. However, notice a signiﬁcant differ-
ence: The modiﬁed board starts with B¼32 black squares
but with W¼30 white squares. Because each tile covers one
black and one white square, the quantity
I¼B/C0W (1)
is invariant even when we make the superﬁcially important
change of placing a tile. This quantity starts at I¼2 and,
thus, remains there. Thus, the ﬁnal tile (the 31st tile) must
cover two black squares—which is impossible because two
black squares cannot be adjacent. The solitaire game cannotbe won, and the invariant in Eq. (1)saves us from entirely
fruitless attempts.
In mathematics, the exhortation to look for invariants is
captured in a saying, “When there is change, look for what
does not change.” Let’s use this approach on a classic gradu-
ate oral-exam problem. Does a ball thrown directly upwardtake longer rising or falling? Or are the times equal (as they
are without air resistance)? Make your choice before read-
ing on.
A related problem, which helps turn mental wheels in pro-
ductive directions, is whether the rise time with drag isgreater or less than the rise time without drag. On the onehand, drag reduces the ball’s total energy and, therefore,speed (relative to the no-drag case)—which increases the
time. On the other hand, by reducing the ball’s energy, drag
reduces the maximum height—which reduces the time.Which effect wins? I don’t know.
However, let’s use energy in the original problem, which
has a symmetry missing from the related problem, namely,that the ball goes up and down.
2Imagine a thin slice of air
(Fig. 2). Without energy loss (i.e., without drag), the ball’s
speed would be the same on its upward journey through theslice as on its corresponding downward journey. However,with energy loss, the ball’s speed is lower—and the timetaken is longer—on its downward journey than on its upwardjourney through the slice. Because this argument holds forall thin slices, the whole downward journey takes longerthan the upward journey.
In the preceding analysis, total energy, E, is not an itself
invariant. However, it’s conceptually close: It’s a monovar-iant, changing only in one direction. The invariant is thus thesign of dE/dt.
A brute-force solution to the problem—by calculating the
upward and downward ﬂight times from scratch—is lessgeneral than the invariant-based analysis, which applies toany drag force, not only the usual quadratic drag. However,assuming quadratic drag, even the brute-force solution getssimpliﬁed by expressing it using invariants—in this case,using dimensionless groups.
Fig. 1. Tile solitaire. (a) Modiﬁed 8 /C28 board for tile solitaire. (b) Failed
attempt at tiling the modiﬁed board. The 31st domino has nowhere to go.
87 Am. J. Phys. 91(2), February 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 87 04 October 2023 22:49:08
The situation’s parameters are Dt, the sought-after time dif-
ference; v0, the launch speed; vterm, the ball’s terminal speed;
andg, representing the physical reason that the ball falls. They
form two decent independent dimensionless groups
v0
vtermandDt
vterm=g: (2)
Then the exact solution, which even Feynman might be hard
pressed to derive during an oral exam, is
Dt
vterm=g¼cosh/C01ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þv0
vterm/C18/C192s
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
downward/C0tan/C01v0
vterm|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
upward: (3)
As an example, for a rock thrown upward at its terminal
speed: tupis roughly 22% (from 1 /C0tan/C011) shorter than the
drag-free time, v0=g; but tdown is only 12% (from
1/C0cosh/C01ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
) shorter than the drag-free time.3
The notion of invariance is part of physics in conserved
quantities with a conserved quantity connected to a symme-try (a superﬁcially important change) through Noether’stheorem. However, the mathematical way of thinking aboutinvariance takes a broader view than just a conserved quan-tity. It encourages us to look for and even create “what does
not change.”
As our ﬁnal example of invariance, one showing the value
of the broader understanding, let’s ﬁnd the period of a small-amplitude pendulum with string length l. Its motion is
complicated with the angle and angular velocity eternallychanging. Without solving a differential equation, we knowonly that the period is a dimensionless constant timesﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
l=gp
.
To ﬁnd that constant, we seemingly need exact methods, notback-of-the-envelope methods.
Enter invariance, an exact back-of-the-envelope method.
To make what does not change, imagine a conical pendulum
(Fig. 3). First studied by Robert Hooke,
4it is a pendulum
with the bob free to rotate in two dimensions and set intomotion so that it rotates in a circle. The bob’s speed, v(t), is
an invariant, as its distance from the vertical axis, r(t).Equally important, projecting its motion onto the xoryaxis
produces ordinary one-dimensional pendulum motion.5
The net force on the bob is directed inward and has magni-
tude Fnet¼mgtanh(Fig. 4). For small angles, Fnet/C25mgh.
Thus, mv2=r/C25mgh. Also for small angles, h/C25r=l,s o
v2
r/C25gh/C25gr
l: (4)
Thus, r=v/C25ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
l=gp
, and the period is
T¼2pr
v/C252pﬃﬃﬃ
l
gs
: (5)
Thanks to invariance, no differential equations were solved
or harmed in ﬁnding the dimensionless constant.Fig. 2. Tube of air swept out by the ball while rising and falling. The upward
journey through the thin slice of air (shaded) is quicker than the correspond-
ing downward journey because drag has by then reduced the ball’s total
energy.Fig. 3. Conical pendulum with string length l. The bob rotates in a circle, so
handrare constant or invariant, as is v, the bob’s speed.
Fig. 4. Freebody diagram for the pendulum bob. Only two forces act on it,
gravity and the force due to string tension. The net force must be inward to
produce the circular motion. Based on the triangle geometry, it has magni-
tude Fnet¼mgtanh.
88 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Sanjoy Mahajan 88 04 October 2023 22:49:08
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂicts to disclose.
Sanjoy Mahajan is interested in the art of approximation
and physics education and has taught varying subsets ofphysics, mathematics, electrical engineering, and mechanicalengineering at MIT, the African Institute for MathematicalSciences, and the University of Cambridge. He is the authorof Street-Fighting Mathematics (MIT Press, 2010), The Art ofInsight in Science and Engineering (MIT Press, 2014), and AStudent’s Guide to Newton’s Laws of Motion (CambridgeUniversity Press, 2020).
a)Electronic mail: sanjoy@mit.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-9565-9283.1This problem was ﬁrst proposed by Max Black, Critical Thinking: An
Introduction to Logic and Scientiﬁc Method (Prentice Hall, Hoboken, NJ,
1946), pp. 157 and 433.
2This up-and-down symmetry is present in another related problem: How
does drag affect the total time (rising plus falling)? It is solved, and for any
power-law drag force, in Carl E. Mungan and Seth T. Rittenhouse, “A verti-cal race up and back down with and without drag,” Am. J. Phys. 89, 67–71
(2021).
3For the related problem, whether the rise time with drag is shorter or longer
than the time without drag, the answer is now clear. In the easy extreme
case of throwing the ball upward with inﬁnite speed, the upward time withdrag remains ﬁnite, at ðp=2Þv
term=g. Thus, in this easy case at least, the time
is shorter than the drag-free time.
4Michael Nauenberg, “Robert Hooke’s seminal contribution to orbital
dynamics,” in Robert Hooke: Tercentennial Studies , edited by Michael
Cooper and Michael Hunter (Routledge, London, 2006), pp. 17–19.
5This point can be demonstrated by writing the vector equation of motion,
€r/C25/C0 ð g=lÞr, as two uncoupled xandyspring equations.
89 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Sanjoy Mahajan 89 04 October 2023 22:49:08
