
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkAPRIL 01 2022
Marinated eggs: An engaging quantitative demonstration of
diffusion 
Carson Emeigh ; Hyeonggeun (Luke) Bak ; Dilziba Kizghin ; Haipeng Zhang ; Sangjin Ryu  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 317–320 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0062178
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
The implementation of lean manufacturing to reduce waste at Pt. Charoen Pokphand Jaya Farm 3
Pekanbaru
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2023)
An Automatic T ool for Opening Embryonated Eggs
Rev Sci Instrum  (December 2004)
Effect of egg shell color on some egg quality in table eggs during storage at refrigerator temperature
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2016) 04 October 2023 23:07:30
NOTES AND DISCUSSION
Marinated eggs: An engaging quantitative demonstration of diffusion
Carson Emeigh
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
Hyeonggeun (Luke) Bak
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
Dilziba Kizghin
Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
Haipeng Zhang
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
Sangjin Ryua)
Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
and Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588
(Received 2 July 2021; accepted 20 February 2022)
Marinated or pickled eggs are enjoyed in cultures across the world, and recipes for these eggs use
diffusion to saturate the egg white of a hard-boiled egg with sauce. Inspired by the marinated egg,
this experiment demonstrates diffusion in an easy and quantitative way. Peeled hard-boiled eggs
are placed in a dye solution, and the penetration distance of the dye into the egg white is measuredas a function of time using image processing. The penetration distances are consistent with the
expected dependence on the square root of time, and the diffusion of the dye occurs faster at higher
temperatures as expected. This experiment provides a new way to demonstrate diffusion-basedmass transfer visually and to make a connection between physics and culture.
#2022 Published under
an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0062178
I. INTRODUCTION
Cooking involves diverse aspects of science, and different
cultures often have similar food recipes relying on the samescientiﬁc principle. For example, Korean soy sauce braised
eggs (GyeRan JangJoRim) are prepared by simmering hard-
boiled eggs in a soy-sauce-based marinade for a short periodof time. Similarly, recipes for Japanese Ramen eggs (Aji
Tamago) marinate hard-boiled eggs in a similar sauce for
hours in a refrigerator. Western pickled eggs and Chinesesalted eggs are also similar. The common physical principle
of these marinated eggs from different cultures is that their
cooking recipes rely on diffusion of sauces through eggwhites.
1
Diffusion is an important mass transfer mechanism by
which a substance is transported from a region of high con-
centration to a region of low concentration as a result of ran-dom molecular motion driven by thermal energy.2Molecules
move randomly (i.e., Brownian motion) driven by their ther-
mal energy in a medium of identical molecules.3This phe-
nomenon called self-diffusion occurs even without anyconcentration gradients. When there is a concentration gradi-
ent of the molecules, the random motion of each individual
molecule results in a directed ﬂux in the direction of the con-centration gradient. In this chemical or transport diffusion,
the concentration distribution of the diffusing substance
through an isotropic medium is described by Fick’s secondlaw of diffusion: @C/@t¼Dr
2C. Here, Cis concentration, tis time, and Dis the diffusion coefﬁcient. For diffusion into
a semi-inﬁnite medium, the following square-root relation-ship is valid if the initial concentration is zero and the sur-face concentration remains constant: the distance of
penetration dis proportional to the square root of time and
the diffusion coefﬁcient: d/(Dt)
1/2.A s Dincreases with
temperature, dincreases with temperature.
A simple demonstration of diffusion is to release an odor
in air, or a drop of dye in stationary water, and then to mea-sure the traveling distance of the odor or dye over time by
students’ noses or eyes.4The diffusion coefﬁcient of the dif-
fusing substance can be estimated by plotting the measureddistances vs time and then curve ﬁtting the plot. These dem-onstrations illustrate the phenomenon of diffusion, but it ischallenging to measure the traveling distance of odor or dye
accurately, eliminating the effect of advection on the trans-
port of odor or dye, and to show the effect of temperature ondiffusion.
We have developed a new demonstration of diffusion using
peeled hard-boiled eggs and food dye, inspired by the afore-mentioned cooking methods for marinated eggs. The eggs sit
in the dye solution for predetermined time intervals, and a sin-
gle egg is taken out at different time points. The egg is slicedin half and then the cross-section is imaged. From the images,the penetration distance of the dye into the egg white is mea-sured by image processing. Then, the square-root relationship
(d/t
1/2) is conﬁrmed by ﬁtting it to the obtained data. The
experiment is then repeated at different temperatures to dem-onstrate the effect of ambient temperature on diffusion.
317 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 317 04 October 2023 23:07:30
II. METHODS
A. Dye immersion and imaging
A dye solution was prepared by mixing 25 ml of red food
dye (Tone’s red food color) with 1.25 l of water. The concen-
tration of the dye had no noticeable effect on the diffusion
behavior of the dye into egg whites, but too low concentra-
tion is not desirable for imaging. Peeled hard-boiled eggs,which were purchased at a local grocery store, were moved
directly from the refrigerator into the dye solution. A con-
tainer (190 mm in diameter and 90 mm in height) allowed
12–15 eggs to be fully immersed in the dye solution. The
container with the eggs was covered with plastic wrap andaluminum foil to prevent contamination and evaporation and
then stored at 4
/C14C (in a refrigerator), 21/C14C (at room temper-
ature), or 60/C14C (in a convection oven).
One egg was taken out of the solution at predetermined
times and imaged. Time intervals were chosen for each of
the different temperatures to ensure that a representative dif-fusion curve could be obtained. For imaging, the egg was
ﬁrst washed under cold water brieﬂy and then dried using
Kim wipes. The egg was then sliced in half along a longitu-
dinal axis using an egg slicer (Beaverve Egg Slicer with
stainless steel cutting wires). Care was taken to ensure thatthe part of the egg touching the container in the dye solution
was not exposed in the sliced cross section and that the egg
slicer was thoroughly cleaned to remove any dyed remnants
from previous eggs.Egg images were taken on a LED backlight (LuxPad22,
Nanguang) in a photo light box (Samtian) to obtain consis-
tent images of the eggs. In the light box, the LED backlightwas placed to face upward, and a circular stand holding the
egg was placed at the center of the LED backlight. The stand
was smaller than the egg, so that it did not show up in
images. A small bubble level was used to ensure that the
cross section of the egg was parallel to the ground.
A digital camera (Canon EOS Rebel T3) with a zoom lens
(Tamron AF28-75 mm f/2.8 Macro) was placed above the
light box using a tripod. A bubble level was used to positionthe camera such that the camera was level with the ground,
ensuring that the camera’s optical axis was perpendicular to
the cross-sectional surface of the egg. The camera was set to
a shutter speed of 1/100 s, an ISO value of 100, and a lens
aperture of f8 in the manual mode. The image was takenusing the camera timer to avoid any disturbances from the
shutter button being pressed. Then, the process was repeated
for the other half of the egg. An example image can be seen
in Fig. 1(a).
To maintain consistency across all images and all experi-
mental trials, the light intensities of the lightbox and thebacklight were not changed across any of the images or any
of the experimental trials, and the position of the tripod,
lightbox, backlight, and circular stand were marked and
meticulously aligned. Also, eggs were imaged with a refer-
ence ruler (Fig. 1(a)) so that the pixel size of each image
could be measured. To evaluate the uncertainty of the
Fig. 1. Image processing steps. (a) Original image of an egg immersed at 21/C14C for 5 h. (b) Grayscale image with intensity adjustment. (c) Black and white or
binary image. (d) Processed image with the identiﬁed boundaries of the dye band. In the enlarged inset, blue lines show the inner and outer boundaries o f the
egg white area penetrated by the red food dye. For each pixel on the inner boundary, the minimum distance to the outer boundary was found, and a selection of
these distances is illustrated with green lines in the ﬁgure. The penetration distance was the average of all these distances. In this case, it was 0.99 mm.
Fig. 2. Comparison of dye penetration into the egg white among 4/C14C, 21/C14C, and 60/C14C at 1, 3, 5, 8, and 24 h.
318 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Emeigh et al. 318 04 October 2023 23:07:30
demonstration, the experiment was performed twice for the
lowest and highest temperatures.
B. Image processing
Images were processed using MATLAB to measure the pene-
tration distance of the dye into the egg white. The imageprocessing steps are summarized in Fig. 1. First, the original
color image (Fig. 1(a)) was converted to a grayscale image
using “rgb2gray,” and the intensity of the grayscale imagewas adjusted for maximum contrast using “imadjust,” asshown in Fig. 1(b). Second, the grayscale image was trans-
formed into a black-and-white or binary image using“imbinarize” with a threshold of 0.3 as shown in Fig. 1(c).
Because the images were taken under the same conditions,
the threshold value was held constant across all images. Anyspeckles were removed from the binary image using“bwareaﬁlt.” As shown in Fig. 1(c), the area of the egg white
penetrated by the dye, or the dye band, appeared white.Third, the inner and outer boundaries of the dye band weredetermined by using “bwtraceboundary” as shown by theblue lines in Fig. 1(d). Finally, the penetration distance of
the dye was determined as follows. For each point of theinner boundary, its minimum distance with respect to theouter boundary was found, and the found distances wereaveraged. The sampling of the distances, shown as green
lines in Fig. 1(d), shows quite uniform spacing between the
boundaries. Accordingly, the standard deviation of the mini-mum distances (0.06 mm) was small compared to the aver-age value (0.99 mm). Also, the average and standarddeviation of the minimum distances of the other egg half(0.9960.10 mm) were very close. This average minimum
distance was the penetration distance dof the red dye into
the egg white.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The experiment and analysis were conducted by three
undergraduate students in engineering, who are the ﬁrst threeauthors of this study. Figure 2compares the penetration of
the red food dye into the white of peeled hard-boiled eggs atthree different temperatures (4
/C14C, 21/C14C, and 60/C14C) at ﬁve
time points (1, 3, 5, 8, and 24 h). As shown in Fig. 3, the dye
diffused deeper into the egg whites with time and tempera-ture. When plotted with respect to t1/2(Fig. 3, the inset),measured penetration distances show a reasonably linear
relationship with t1/2, in accordance with the expected
square-root relationship [i.e., d(t)¼kt1/2]. The R2values for
the least squares ﬁt of the relationship were 0.97, 0.94, and0.86 for 4
/C14C, 21/C14C, and 60/C14C, respectively.
It should be noted that the results shown in Fig. 3were not
from one single egg for each temperature, but from multipleeggs immersed at the same time. There could be variationsin the structure and permeability of the egg white amongeggs. The standard deviations of the penetration distancewere found for time points with two data points. Whileexamining more eggs marinated under the same conditionswould be required to conclusively support the t
1/2depen-
dence, the fact that most data points seem to lie within astandard deviation of the best ﬁt line provides additional sup-port for the dependence.
The diffusion of the dye occurred more rapidly at higher
temperatures.
5,6The penetration distance increased with the
temperature at each of the time points in Fig. 2, and the value
ofkwas found to be 0.41, 0.52, and 1.64 for 4/C14C, 21/C14C, and
60/C14C, respectively, in Fig. 3.S i n c e kis proportional to D1/2,
the increasing kvalues suggest that the diffusion coefﬁcient of
the dye through the egg white increased with the temperature.
IV. CONCLUSION
The proposed experiment using peeled hard-boiled eggs
and food dye can demonstrate the physics of diffusion well,and it can be done easily in various educational settings.When employed at school, the proposed experiment can bemodiﬁed as follows. A common cooking apparatus such as aslow cooker or instant pot can be used instead of a convec-tion oven to demonstrate diffusion at a high temperature.Eggs can be immersed in a dye solution at staggered times inadvance of the experiment in order to allow a class of stu-dents to make all the measurements at the same time. Theimage processing part of the experiment can be replaced bystudents’ manual measurements of the penetration distance.Different types of dye can be used to demonstrate how diffu-sion is affected by the molecule size of dyes. Soy sauce ormarinade of students’ choice could be used instead ofthe food dye solution so that students could “taste” thedifferences in diffusion. Since the proposed demonstrationis inspired by cooking methods to marinate or pickle hard-boiled eggs, students can learn how to relate their learning of
Fig. 3. Penetration distance of the dye vs time at (a) 4/C14C, (b) 21/C14C, and (c) 60/C14C with the square-root relationship ﬁtted against the entire dataset of each
case. Error bars in (a) and (c): standard deviation ( N¼2).
319 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Emeigh et al. 319 04 October 2023 23:07:30
diffusion to daily life or the real world through context-
based learning.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the University of Nebraska
Collaboration Initiative Grant. C.E. and H.B. were supported
by the Undergraduate Creative Activities and ResearchExperience (UCARE) program of the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: sryu2@unl.edu,
ORCID: 0000-0001-9142-3030.1H. Hashiba, H. Gocho, and J. Komiyama, “Dual mode diffusion and sorp-tion of sodium chloride in pre-cooked egg white,” LWT Food Sci. Technol.
41, 1978–1986 (2008).
2D. T. Gillespie and E. Seitaridou, Simple Brownian Diffusion: An
Introduction to the Standard Theoretical Models (Oxford U. P., London,
2013).
3A. Bunde, C. Chmelik, J. K €arger, C. Chmelik, and G. Vogl, “Spreading
fundamentals,” in Diffusive Spreading in Nature ,Technology and Society ,
edited by Armin Bunde, J €urgen Caro, J €org K €arger, and Gero Vogl
(Springer, New York, 2018), pp. 11–25.
4J. V. Masi, “Experiments in diffusion: Gases, liquids, and solids for under
ﬁve dollars,” in 1998 Annual Conference of American Society of
Engineering Education (ASEE) , Seattle, Washington, 1998, pp.
3.280.1–3.280.6.
5C. Rossell /C19o, J. Ca ~nellas, S. Simal, and A. Berna, “Simple mathematical
model to predict the drying rates of potatoes,” J. Agric. Food Chem. 40,
2374–2378 (1992).
6G. Xanthopoulos, S. Yanniotis, and Gr. Lambrinos, “Water diffusivity
and drying kinetics of air drying of ﬁgs,” Drying Technol. 27, 502–512
(2009).
AJP Index to Advertisers
Princeton University Press Ad ......................... Cover 2
AAPT Membership. ................................ Page 241
AAPT ComPADRE ................................ Page 243
AAPT Summer 2022 Meeting ........................ Page 244
AAPT Career Center ...................................T O C
320 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Emeigh et al. 320 04 October 2023 23:07:30
