
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkOCTOBER 01 2022
Maxwell's color box: Retracing the path of color matching
experiments 
Valentina Roberti  
 ; Boris Kalinic ; Tiziana Cesca ; Luca Bacci ; Giulio Peruzzi  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 787–794 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0087786
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Phase matching retracing behavior for second harmonic generation in LiB 3O5 crystal
Journal of Applied Physics  (February 1993)
Optical ray retracing of Brillouin backscatter from a nonisothermal plasma
Physics of Fluids  (April 1981)
Phase ‐ matching retracing behavior: New features in LiB 3O5
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (September 1991) 04 October 2023 23:19:04
Maxwell’s color box: Retracing the path of color matching experiments
Valentina Roberti,a)Boris Kalinic, Tiziana Cesca, Luca Bacci, and Giulio Peruzzib)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Padua, Via Marzolo, 8-35131 Padova, Italy
(Received 9 February 2022; accepted 8 July 2022)
In his 1860 paper On the theory of compound colours , James Clerk Maxwell described an
instrument used to obtain a direct comparison between daylight and a mixture of three selectedspectral colors. This investigation was part of Maxwell’s study of human color vision, color
perception, and color representation, and it encompasses his main achievements in the ﬁeld. The
working principle underlying this device provided the basis from which color diagrams have been
derived, beginning with the standard chromaticity diagram proposed by the International
Commission on Illumination in 1931. We describe a reconstruction of Maxwell’s original versionof the color box. Constructing and analyzing data obtained with such a replica could serve as a
semester project for advanced optics students.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0087786
I. INTRODUCTION
James Clerk Maxwell’s pioneering work on the nature of
color and the phenomenon of color vision opened the door tomodern color theory and colorimetry. The aim of this paperis to describe a reproduction of Maxwell’s original colorbox, an instrument that allows direct comparison, in bothcolor and intensity, of white light with a mixture of spectralcolors. The working principle underlying this device hasbeen of crucial importance for the advance of color sciencein that it provided the basis for all subsequent color matchinginvestigations.
We consider this reconstruction of Maxwell’s color box to
be an example of the experimental history of science,wherein historical experiments are reconstructed with mod-ern equipment or with original coeval materials.
1Since sim-
ply studying original texts rarely provides the informationrequired to fully comprehend historical experiments, recon-structions facilitate clearer understanding of both Maxwell’swritings and drawings. This allowed us to uncover signiﬁ-cant aspects of the experimental technique and the method ofobservations, which were not made explicit in the originaltext.
The outline of this paper is as follows: Sec. IIprovides a
brief overview of both the scientiﬁc context in whichMaxwell’s research on colors started and his main achieve-ments in the ﬁeld. Section IIIdescribes Maxwell’s original
color box, and Sec. IVdescribes our replica. Results are
reported and analyzed in Sec. V, and some concluding
remarks are offered in Sec. VI.
II. BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY
Maxwell began experimenting with colors in 1849 under
the guidance of James David Forbes, Professor of NaturalPhilosophy at the University of Edinburgh. At that time,Edinburgh hosted a rich group of scientists working with col-ors which included David Ramsey Hay, a decorative painterand color theorist, William Swan, a physicist dealing withoptics and spectroscopy, David Brewster, a physicist, inven-tor and expert in experimental optics, and George Wilson, achemist interested in the problem of color deﬁciencies inhumans. Wilson was a pupil of John Dalton, who had suf-fered from color blindness.Maxwell’s ideas on the nature of colors and color vision
were largely derived from the writings of Newton
2and
Young,3from whose work he drew aspects that he accepted,
elaborated, and revised in the development of his own the-ory. Among his key contributions in this ﬁeld, he clariﬁed
for the ﬁrst time (together with Hermann von Helmholtz,
working independently) the distinction between additive andsubtractive color mixture, thus eliminating Newton’s confu-sion between optical and pigment mixture of colors, a confu-
sion which persisted in Young’s treatment. Maxwell adopted
Newton’s analogy of the center of gravity to predict the out-come of optical mixture of light, removing the arbitrarychoice of the number of primary colors. By conductingexperiments on individuals suffering from color-blindness,
Maxwell demonstrated that one of the receptors in the human
retina should have a particularly high sensitivity to the redportion of the spectrum, which was invisible to color-blindsubjects. This provided the ﬁrst indirect conﬁrmation of
Young’s three receptor theory.
III. DESCRIPTION OF THE ORIGINAL
INSTRUMENT
Maxwell’s investigations in the ﬁeld were at ﬁrst based on
rotating color discs.
4Known since antiquity, spinning discs
were the simplest instruments developed to obtain what we
now call additive mixture of colors. A classical color wheel
consists of a disc that is divided into sectors painted with dif-ferent colors and afﬁxed to a spinning top. When the top
reaches a sufﬁciently high rotation speed, the colored sectors
are no longer distinguishable by the observer, who insteadperceives a color produced by additive mixing. By using areﬁned version of the color wheel, Maxwell obtained the ﬁrst
quantitative expression of color mixing in form of what he
called “colorimetric equations” and consequently the ﬁrstsketch of his color diagram. However, results obtained withcolor wheel could be difﬁcult to reproduce due to variations
in the rotational velocity.
Beginning in 1852, Maxwell turned his attention to the
study of spectral light in order to achieve more accurate andreproducible equations, adopting Newton’s ideas of usinglenses, prisms, and mirrors to realize dispersion, recombina-
tion, and reﬂection of light. This led to a visual spectrometer
of his own design, which he named the “colour box.”
787 Am. J. Phys. 90(10), October 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 787 04 October 2023 23:19:04
As related in his 1871 paper On Colour Vision , “I have […]
constructed an instrument which I may call a colour box, forthe purpose of making matches between two colours […]. Itis nothing but the realization of the construction of one ofNewton’s propositions in his Lectiones Opticae , where he
shows how to take a beam of light, to separate it into its com-ponents, to deal with these components as we please bymeans of slits, and afterwards to unite them into a beamagain.”
5The development of this instrument underwent a rel-
atively long gestation, however. As Maxwell wrote in a letterto Forbes in 1857, he made three different versions between1852 and the time of the letter; details can be found inRef. 7, vol. I. He continued experimenting with the box dur-
ing the time he was in London as the chair of NaturalPhilosophy at King’s College (1860–1865), where he and hiswife Katherine accumulated more data on color vision. The
measuring procedure was conducted in an attic at the top of
their house while being looked on in astonishment by theneighbors, who mistook the box for a cofﬁn.
6From 1862 to
1865, Maxwell was able to record about 200 observationseach year because all guests experimented with the box,including Hermann von Helmholtz.
7
We chose to replicate the original form of the color box
for several reasons. First, we are not aware of the existenceof an original copy of the instrument, although the originalof Maxwell’s “portable” light box is preserved at theCavendish Laboratory. Our motivation was to make thisobject live again and bring to light both the strengths andweaknesses of the design to better understand its evolutionand need for reﬁnements.
Several of Maxwell’s writings document the original opti-
cal system and provided guidance to repeat the experimentas exactly as possible. In particular, our work is based on thedescription and original sketches and drawings contained inthe paper published in 1860, On the Theory of Compound
Colours and the Relations of the Colours of the Spectrum .
The system, shown in Fig. 1(a), consists of two rectangular
wooden boxes ﬁxed together at an angle of about 100
/C14. The
whole of the inside of the instrument is painted black. Thelonger box is about 152 cm long, 18 cm broad, and 10 cmdeep, while the shorter is about 70 cm long, 13 cm broad,and 10 cm deep. Apertures are located at point E and at theend AC. The longer box contains a slit system at AB (whichwe describe later), a wooden screen BD, a lens L, a systemof two equilateral prisms P to obtain dispersion, and a reﬂec-tive mirror M. The components are adjusted to allow whitelight coming from the sun to enter from a slit located at Eand provide a spectrum at AB, while the mirror reﬂects whitelight from E to the opening at BC. Three slits were posi-
tioned across AB; their widths could be adjusted to select
speciﬁc wavelength ranges. Exploiting the reversibility ofthe optical path, if white light is admitted through the endof the box AC, an observer at E would see a ﬁeld consistingof two halves separated by the edge of the prism (Fig. 1(c)).
On the left side, the observer sees the composition of thethree selected spectral colors, and on the right white lightreﬂected from the mirror. In effect, the color box is a spec-troscope with two prisms as the dispersive element.
The two paths are used to select three colors and then
superpose them on the left side of the ﬁeld of view at E.Suppose that white light enters at E and that the portion fall-ing on X belongs to the red part of the spectrum. Then if weadmit white light at X and observe at E, we should see theleft side of the ﬁeld of view uniformly illuminated with redlight; the thin slit at E should not allow the other portion of
the spectrum to reach the eye. Now let slit Y correspond tothe green portion of the spectrum; then, if white light isadmitted at Y, the prism, as seen at E, will be uniformly illu-minated with green light. If white light is admitted throughX and Y simultaneously, the colors on the left side at E willbe a mixture of red and green. The third slit Z enables one tocombine any three colors in any proportion desired byadjusting the widths of the slits. By adjusting the slits, thetwo portions of the ﬁeld at E can be made equal in color andintensity.
The slit system is shown in Fig. 1(b). This comprises a
rectangular frame of brass A
0B0, having an aperture of 15.24
/C22.54 cm2(6/C21 in.). The inner edge of this frame is gradu-
ated in steps of 0.127 cm (0.05 in.), so the position of anycolor can be read off on the scale. The slits are formed frompieces of metal bent over at their ends; the spaces betweenthem were ﬁlled by pieces of V-shaped black cardboard. Tomeasure the width of the slits, Maxwell used a graduatedwedge-shaped piece of metal tapering to a point; this wasinserted into a slit with the width being determined by thelength of the wedge that ﬁt through.
A. Measurement procedure and wavelength calibration
Maxwell described the optimum working conditions as:
“In making the experiment, the instrument was placed on atable in a room moderately lighted, with the end AB turnedtowards a large board covered with white paper, and placedin the open air, so as to be uniformly illuminated by thesun.”
8With this arrangement, any slight variation of light
intensity will affect both halves of the ﬁeld of view equally.
To determine the wavelength corresponding to any point
of the spectrum AB, Maxwell made use of an interferencemethod; this appears to be the ﬁrst occasion in which inter-ference methods were employed for this purpose.
9He sepa-
rated two plane surfaces of glass by strips of gold leaf so asto enclose a thin layer of air. White light was reﬂected from
this layer and allowed to pass through the opening at E. This
produced an interference spectrum at AB that consisted ofalternating bright and dark bands produced by constructiveand destructive interference. This was analyzed by means ofa lens, with dark bands taken as reference and numberedfrom 0, which corresponded to the one in the red portion ofthe spectrum. Dark bands were numbered 1, 2, 3, and so ontowards the violet end of the spectrum. By observing thepositions of these bands in relation to two Fraunhofer linesin the spectrum, it was possible to determine the wavelengthsof the bands and thus calibrate the spectrum. Before applyingthe interference method, the position of all the visibleFraunhofer lines was marked on the scale. The process isdescribed in further detail in pp. 67–69 of Maxwell’s 1860paper,
8and the mathematical details can be found in Sec. S1
of the Supplementary Material.12At the time, Fraunhofer
lines were commonly employed as reference wavelengths.10
Sixteen equidistant points on the slit scale were chosen to
deﬁne standard colors, of which three of were selected as pri-maries. These corresponded to positions 24, 44, and 68 onMaxwell’s scale, which are, respectively, a bright scarletabout one third of the distance from Fraunhofer lines C to D,a green near line E, and a blue about one third of the distancefrom the F to G lines. The reason for this choice is describedin Maxwell’s 1860 paper (Ref. 8, p. 69): “I chose these
points because they are well separated from each other on
788 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Roberti et al. 788 04 October 2023 23:19:04
the scale, and because the colour of the spectrum at these
points does not appear to the eye to vary very rapidly, either
in hue or brightness, in passing from one point to another.”
Although originally selected for convenience, red, green, andblue turned out to be effectively the three additive primary
colors of human vision, which Maxwell himself came to sus-
pect (Ref. 8, p. 74).
The result of an observation could be expressed as
x24ðÞþy44ðÞþz68ðÞ¼W
/C3: (1)
This expression asserts that a mixture of the three chosen
standard colors is, in the opinion of the observer, identical
with a neutral tint, that is, standard white, which is represented
byW*. The coefﬁcients x, y, and z represent the width of the
slits and the numbers (24), (44), and (68) refer to the positions
of the chosen primaries on the scale. Maxwell then could varythe width of the slits, one at the time, obtaining other color
equations that he compared with the standard ones (in which
all standard colors appeared). In this way, by combining each
color with two chosen standard colors, it was possible to
obtain a white equal to the standard white. Further details onthis appear in Sec. S2 of the Supplementary Material, but an
example is given here.
Maxwell ﬁrst calculated the mean of the standard equa-
tions obtained from twenty observations to determine the
coefﬁcients x,y, and z. This gave
18:62 4ðÞþ31:44 4ðÞþ30:56 8ðÞ¼W
/C3: (2)
When the positions (44) and (68) (green and red) were held
ﬁxed, it was found that at position (20), a slit width of 44.3,
combined with slightly narrower green and red slits, also
yielded the same standard white
44:32 0ðÞþ31:04 4ðÞþ27:76 8ðÞ¼W/C3: (3)
Equating these two expressions gives
44:32 0ðÞ ¼18:62 4ðÞþ0:44 4ðÞþ2:86 8ðÞ : (4)
Now lay out an equilateral triangle, assigning slit positions
(24), (44), and (68) to the vertices, which are locatedarbitrary at R(/C01; 0), G(1; 0), and B(0; 1,73), respectively;
refer to Fig. 6. As Maxwell wrote, “… to ﬁnd the position of
any other colour, say (20), divide AC in P so that (18.6) AP¼(2.8) PC, and then divided BP in Q so that (18.6 þ2.8) PQ
¼(0.4) QB. At the point Q, the colour corresponding to (20)
must be placed.” This process is repeated for all other colors,building up the color triangle. This procedure is furtherdescribed in Sec. V.
In proceeding in this way, Maxwell was motivated by
ideas drawn from Newton and Young. From Newton, he
drew the idea of predicting the outcome of optical mixturesof light in analogy with the calculation of center of gravity
(Fig. 2(a)) with the weights represented by the widths of
each slit.
The idea of a color triangle was pioneered by Young; see
Fig. 2(b). Here, we again quote Maxwell (Ref. 5, Vol. II,
p. 272): “The three primary colours will be at the three
[corners], white or gray will be in the middle, the tint ordegree of purity [in modern terms, degree of saturation of
color] of any colour will be expressed by its distance from
the middle point, and its hue [color, deﬁned by its wave-length] will depend on the angular position of the line which
joins it with the middle point. Thus, the ideas of tint and hue
can be expressed geometrically on Young’s triangle […].”By analyzing the colorimetric equations based on his (J) and
Katherine’s (K) observations, Maxwell conﬁrmed his expec-
tation that a triangular diagram could represent all colors ofthe spectrum. He also succeeded in determining the intensity
curves of the three chosen standard colors and reported the
value of fourteen selected tints expressed in terms of the pri-maries; see Fig. S2(II) of the Supplementary Material.
IV. CONSTRUCTION OF THE REPLICA:
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND CHOICEOF COMPONENTS
We have constructed our replica color box using materials,
components, and equipment that are commonly available in
undergraduate laboratories. A list of the required compo-nents and approximate prices can be found in the
Supplementary Material, Table S6. As much as possible, we
attempted to maintain both the original observation and
Fig. 1. (a) Maxwell’s original model for the color box: letter E indicates the slit from which light enters; the lens, the mirror, and the two prisms are l abelled L,
M, and P, respectively. The end panel of the box containing the slit system is indicated by AB. (b) End panel detail, showing Maxwell’s slit system. (c) D etails
of the prism, mirror, and lens conﬁguration (Ref. 8, plate I).
789 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Roberti et al. 789 04 October 2023 23:19:04
measuring procedures in order to be able to compare our
data with those of Maxwell.
A. Optical table and lens
The framework of the instrument consists of an optical
bench of dimensions 600 /C21200 /C212.7 mm3. All compo-
nents were ﬁxed on post holders (Figs. 3(a) and3(d)). Our
converging lens of 20 cm focal length (Fig. 3(d) III) is placed
so that the distance LE in Fig. 1(a) corresponds to its princi-
pal focal distance.
B. Adjustable iris aperture diaphragm and slit
We introduced a new element that plays a role analogous
to the thin wooden partition in which the lens L is embedded.
This is an adjustable iris aperture diaphragm (Fig. 3(d) II),
positioned between the lens and the slit E. The size of thecircular aperture regulates the amount of light which passes
through the lens or otherwise which reaches the eye of theobserver on the path back. It can be inferred from Maxwell’s
writings that he used a circular aperture at position E (Ref. 5,
Vol. II, p. 274). As to the dimensions of the aperture, guid-
ance can be found in Lord Rayleigh’s Experiments on
Colour (1881). Rayleigh carried out more exact measure-
ments with a reﬁned color box twenty years after Maxwell’s
ﬁrst investigations and wrote that “In an instrument of thisclass a full degree of brightness requires that the width of theeye-slit […] should not contract the aperture of the eye, i.e.,
should not be less than about one-ﬁfth of an inch.”
11
We chose to work with an aperture of diameter about 1 cm
(Fig. 3(d) I), which well-exceeds this lower limit.
C. The system of prisms
According to Fig. 1(c), the two equilateral prisms should
be placed in the position of minimum deviation, that is, the
position for which the angle through which light is bent byeach prism is the smallest possible. By imposing this condi-
tion, the angle of incidence at the ﬁrst surface of the ﬁrst
prism is equal to the angle of emergence at the second sur-face of the second prism. This ensures that light rays travel
almost parallel to the bases of the prisms, yielding a symmet-
rical conﬁguration.
Fig. 2. (a) Newton’s color mixing circle indicating his theoretical method to
determine the compound color resulting from any mixture of seven primary
colors, arbitrary chosen exploiting the analogy between colors and musicaltones. The arcs correspond to the principal colors, red, orange, yellow,
green, blue, indigo, and violet. At the center of gravity of these sections, a
small circle can be found. Being the area of each sector proportional to the
number of rays of the color that enter a given mixture, the common center of
gravity can be determined. Let that point be Z, then the place of point Y in
the circumference will represent the spectral color of the mixture and the
distance of point Z from the center will show the saturation of the color(Ref. 2). (b) Young’s triangular representation of colors, with red, green, and
blue at the vertices (Ref. 3, Vol. II, plate XXIX).
Fig. 3. (a) Our replica seen from above, with light path indicated. The grey
dotted lines enclose the area to be covered by the cardboard lid during the
observation and measurement procedures. The labeled elements comprise
the optical system for dispersing or recombining light in the shorter arm of
the box. From bottom to top, the round opening (I), adjustable iris aperture
diaphragm (II), lens of 20 cm focal length (III), ﬂint prisms (IV), and mirror
(V). (b) Front view of our three slits for selection of the three primaries, red,green, and blue, at our positions 2, 7, and 13, respectively. Our scale is
divided into 15 equal parts, each 0.8 cm long. On the left, the entrance aper-
ture for white light. (c) Back view of the slit system, showing V-shaped
black cardboards ﬁlling the space between the slits. (d) System of prisms
detail. Letter F denotes ﬂint glass. (e) The metal wedge graduated in steps of
0.5 mm. (f) Schematic diagram of the replica: (I-V) optical components
described above, (VI) two black cardboard screens, (VII) a black cardboardpartition for the separation of the two optical paths, (VIII) the slit system,
and (IX) the small rectangular opening for the white light. The size of the
optical components is enlarged for clarity.
790 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Roberti et al. 790 04 October 2023 23:19:04
Our ﬁrst task was to determine the refractive index of the
prisms used by Maxwell to obtain his 15 cm-wide spectrumat AB. Although he did not mention the refractive index ofthe prisms, it is possible to derive this by exploiting the rela-tion between refractive index and dispersive power, whichalso provides information about both length of the longerbox and spectrum (see the Supplementary Material, Sec. S3).To allow for the formation of a spectrum of about 15 cm at adistance of about 150 cm (the length of the longer side of theoriginal box), an angular width of the system of 100
/C14could
be obtained using two prisms of refractive index of about1.53. We had ﬂint (n ¼1.62) and crown (n ¼1.51) glass
prisms at available, and chose to use the former given thedimensions of our optical table; this allowed larger angulardispersion and, consequently, the formation of a spectrumwith dimensions comparable with those used by Maxwell.By imposing the condition for minimum deviation, we calcu-lated both the angle between the two prisms ( v) and the
angular width of the system ( f) obtaining as a result vﬃ108
/C14
andfﬃ84/C14(see Sec. S3).
D. Slit system and width measurement
Our slit system is shown in Figs. 3(b) and3(c). The move-
able slits were fabricated with three pairs of hardened steel0.4-mm thick knife edges. These thin pieces of metal areinserted in a metal frame painted black with a rectangular aper-ture of 15.0 /C22.5 cm
2. Magnets with dimensions 2 /C215 mm2
were positioned above and below the opening to allow the slits
to slide in order to select the desired portion of the spectrum.As with Maxwell’s version, the space between the slits is ﬁlledwith pieces of V-shaped black cardboard to ensure only lightpassing through the slits reaches the prisms (Fig. 3(c)). The
cardboard pieces are ﬁxed with adhesive tape at the ends of thesix thin metal slices forming the slits so that they can berestricted or extended at will. The width of each slit was mea-sured by using a metal wedge (Fig. 3(e)) with an apex angle of
about 10
/C14, consistent with Maxwell’s description. The surface
of the wedge is graduated in increments of 0.5 mm.
Another small rectangular window was created in the metal
frame next to the slit system to admit white light. Two sheetsof translucent vellum paper were employed to enhance thedispersion. One of these was interposed between the guideand the thin rectangles forming the slits, and the other waspositioned in front of the aperture for white light. These sheetsplay the same role as white paper used by Maxwell.
E. Light source and wavelength calibration
The wavelengths selected by Maxwell were converted in
nanometers for direct comparison. Our scale comprises 16
equidistant points numbered from 0 to 15 (Fig. 4(b)), and the
wavelength calibration was carried out by means of a ﬁber-coupled portable spectrometer (Ocean Optics HR4000). Itwas, therefore, possible to detect the positions of Maxwell’sprimaries corresponding approximately to labels 2 (red), 7(green), and 13 (blue), as shown in Fig. 3(b) (see also the
Supplementary Material, Sec. S4).
Our ﬁrst intention was to reproduce Maxwell’s experiment
by using sunlight as the light source, but in order to obtain amore intense spectrum and to provide greater reproducibility(which could be affected, e.g., by weather conditions), differ-ent artiﬁcial light sources were tested, including a 150-wattphotography studio light. However, the best source turnedout to be sunlight: light from artiﬁcial sources is divergent,
causing non-uniform illumination of the paper, whereas sun-
light travels in approximately parallel beams.
F. Method of observation
After aligning our replica, we proceeded with measure-
ments. As related by Maxwell, an operator and observermust work together. The observer forms a judgment regard-
ing the color of the two semicircles composing the ﬁeld of
view and communicates to the operator the sensation of colorwhich appears to be predominant. The operator then alters
the breadth of one or more slits, always keeping the center of
each slit at the proper point on the scale, until the left semi-circle is made as white as the right side. When no difference
can be detected between the two ﬁelds in either color or
intensity, the observer should look away for a while and thenlook again. If the observer still judges the two parts of the
ﬁeld to be equal, then the operator measures the breadth
of each slit and records the corresponding color equation.
Fig. 4. (a) Gaussian ﬁts of the spectra acquired by the ﬁber-coupled portable
spectrometer. The maxima of the Gaussian curves identify the wavelength
corresponding to each slit. (b) Wavelengths corresponding to slit positions.Grey squares refer to the wavelengths measured by the interference method
used by Maxwell related to the 16 chosen positions in the original experi-
ment (data from Table S2(I)). Red dots indicate the peak wavelengths
detected by the ﬁber-coupled portable spectrometer corresponding to each
slit on our scale. Slits 2, 7, and 13 correspond, respectively, to positions 24,
44, and 68 on Maxwell’s scale (see Table S4).
791 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Roberti et al. 791 04 October 2023 23:19:04
The measurements should be repeated several times by the
same operator for different observers.
Here, we comment on some issues that emerged during
the observation process.
Once we obtained a spectrum of the desired length at AB,
we veriﬁed the presence of the circular bipartite ﬁeld at posi-
tion E. To achieve the best alignment by inverting the optical
path, we ﬁrst adjusted the iris aperture and then the lens. Themost difﬁcult part of this is to align the components so as to
see at the center of the ﬁeld a dark line corresponding to the
edge of the prism. When looking into slit E, however, it is
impossible to simultaneously focus both sides of the ﬁeld
because the images lie on two different planes. Another issueis hue and brightness discrimination: we found that our eyes
could more easily discriminate color differences rather than
brightness differences, as Maxwell himself related (Ref. 8,
pp. 72–73). It typically required some time before reaching
equality of brightness.
Operationally, we found that when the ﬁeld illuminated
with white light (right side in Fig. S5(I)) appeared tinged
with the complementary color of the color visible on the leftside of the ﬁeld, the slit corresponding to the complementary
color should be enlarged to obtain a good match. Further
details appear in Fig. S5(I) of the Supplementary Material.
Maxwell reported the same process (Ref. 8, p. 69).
A full consideration of the phenomenon of color percep-
tion also requires careful consideration of its subjectivedimensions. To limit errors due to natural subjective scatter,
a large number of observers should be tested. As Maxwell
wrote, “… the eyes of different observers vary in accuracy,
but agree with each other so nearly as to leave no doubt that
the law of colour-vision is identical for all ordinary eyes”(Ref. 4, p. 278). This is what makes possible deﬁning a stan-
dard color representation, from which deviations for individ-
ual subjects can be assessed.
V. ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Following Maxwell, we obtained standard color equations
in which a combination of the three chosen primaries wascombined to furnish white (see Fig. 5). According to our
scale, Eq. (1)assumes the form
m
22ðÞþm77ðÞþm1313ðÞ¼W/C3; (5)
where the coefﬁcients m2,m7;andm13represent the width of
our slits. We then combined other colors with two standard
ones to test different matches: the orange-yellow color corre-
sponding to position 3 on our scale must be combined with
green and blue, the blue-green at position 8 must be com-
bined with red and blue, and the blue at position 12 must bemixed with red and green.
As described earlier, we plot an equilateral triangle in the
(x, y) plane, assigning slit positions 2, 7, and 13 to the verti-
ces, which are located at R(/C01; 0), G(1; 0), and B(0; 1,73),
respectively. Then, from the standard equations, we could
detect the position of the standard white by exploiting theanalogy with the calculation of the center of gravity
x
cm¼X3
i¼1mixi
X3
i¼1mi;ycm¼X3
i¼1miyi
X3
i¼1mi; (6)which becomes, in our case
xcm¼m2xRþm7xGþm13xB
m2þm7þm13;
ycm¼m2yRþm7yGþm13yB
m2þm7þm13; (7)
where xR,xG,xBandyR,yG,yBrepresent the x and y coordi-
nates of R, G, and B, respectively. We averaged the results often standard equations of the form of Eq. (5)to locate the cen-
ter of mass, which lies approximately at the orthocenter of thetriangle, conﬁrming Maxwell’s method; see Fig. 6. While
Maxwell used a graphical method to detect the white point(the Supplementary Material, Sec. S2, and Ref. 8, p. 73), this
is entirely equivalent to the center-of-mass calculation. Wewere able to compare the position of our white point with that
obtained from Maxwell’s and Katherine’s observations by
superimposing his color diagrams, which can be found in plateI of his 1860 paper, over our triangle. As shown in Figs. 6(a)
and 6(b), our results turned out to be very consistent with
theirs. With the location of white identiﬁed, the positions ofall the other colors of the spectrum can be determined.
Maxwell’s color diagram is a bi-dimensional representa-
tion of color space with the two variables being hue (wave-length) and saturation, whereas the brightness is maintainedconstant. For this reason, all saturated colors (wavelengthscorresponding to scale positions) are located on the perime-ter of the triangle. Any other color inside the triangle can beexpressed in terms of the “amount” of light of the threeprimary colors involved in the mixture and identiﬁed interms of its distance from white, as in Newton’s color circle.When we graphically detect the position (x, y) of a given
Fig. 5. (a) Bipartite ﬁeld as seen at position E when white light is admitted
only through slit 13 of our system. The left side is, therefore, uniformly illu-
minated with blue light. The right side is illuminated with pure white com-
ing from the sun (Canon EOS 2000D; 8 in.; f/5,6; 70 mm; ISO 400). (b)
Bipartite ﬁeld as seen at position E when white light is allowed to enter only
through slit 7. The left side is uniformly illuminated with green light. (c)Bipartite ﬁeld as seen at position E when white light is allowed to enter only
through slit 2. The left side is uniformly illuminated with red light. (d) A
perfect match between the two halves of the bipartite ﬁeld. White light is
admitted to enter through slits 2, 7, and 13. A white (on the left) equal to the
standard one (on the right) is obtained by properly regulating the width of
the three slits, i.e., the intensities of the three primaries.
792 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Roberti et al. 792 04 October 2023 23:19:04
color inside the triangle, as Maxwell wrote in his article, we
can extend the straight line passing through (x, y) and (xwhite; y white) to a side of the triangle, where scale positions
are marked. In this way, we can identify both its wavelength
and the wavelength of its complementary color, which is onthe opposite side of the triangle passing through white.
One modiﬁcation we made to the observational procedure
was to use a camera (Canon EOS 2000D) ﬁxed on a tripodfor image acquisition. This allowed us to maintain a ﬁxedinclination angle for each color match, ensuring as muchreproducibility as possible and avoiding changes in theobserver’s position.
Finally, it is worth noting that while our results are consis-
tent with those obtained by Maxwell, there are some inevita-ble uncertainties. This is due to the fact that Maxwell’striangle representation is a good approximation of a bi-dimensional additive color space, but it introduces someinaccuracies. These discrepancies between geometrical rep-resentation and real sensation of colors were partiallyresolved when it became recognized that the color space
describing human color perception cannot be described by
Euclidean geometry. Riemann and Helmholtz ﬁrst proposed
an interpretation of the geometry of color space as an exam-
ple of non-Euclidean geometry.
13,14
Today, the fundamental processes of color vision and per-
ception still remain unexplained. New research areas of both
applied and theoretical color science have emerged, for exam-
ple, the development of increasingly reﬁned color appearancemodels on the basis of color matching experiments and
advanced studies on color space geometry. Systematic study of
color space is now a cutting-edge topic in the ﬁelds of psycho-
physics, experimental psychology, and geometry.
VI. CONCLUSION
Replicating Maxwell’s color box has given us a deeper
appreciation of its design and operating principles. With its
combination of simplicity and effectiveness, the color boxopened the ﬁeld of colorimetry; its method of directly com-
paring two adjacent colored ﬁelds established at the base of
modern color matching experiments and colorimetric techni-
ques. Following the work of Maxwell, English physicists
Guild and Wright subsequently (1920s–1930s) determined
color matching functions from which the CIE (Commission
International d’Eclairage) color system
15was established.
The science of color is intimately linked with subjective
experience. Maxwell was well aware of this, and we close
with his own reﬂection on this aspect of his work (Ref. 5,
Vol. II, p. 275): “I do not profess to reconcile this discrep-
ancy between ordinary and scientiﬁc experience. It only
shews that it is impossible by a mere act of introspection to
make a true analysis of our sensations. Consciousness is our
only authority; but consciousness must be methodically
examined in order to obtain any trustworthy results.”
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge support from the Mechanical
Workshop of the Department of Physics and Astronomy of
the University of Padova for the fabrication of the slit systemand other key components of the replica, and from Sara
Magrin, Roberto Temporin, and Giampietro Viola of the
Didactic Laboratories of the Department for the material
provided to test the reproducibility of the replica. The
authors gratefully acknowledge the anonymous reviewers for
the careful reading of our manuscript and their many
insightful comments and suggestions.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)ORICID: 0000-0003-4375-4905.
b)ORICID: 0000-0001-8331-1864.
1L. Fors, L. M. Principe, and H. O. Sibum, “From the library to the labora-
tory and back again: experiment as a tool for historians of science,”
Ambix 63(2), 85–97 (2016).
2I. Newton, Optiks or a Treatise of the Reﬂections, Refractions, Inﬂections
and Colours of Light (Dover, New York, 1979).
3T. Young, A Course of Lectures on Natural Philosophy and the
Mechanical Arts: Pt. I. Mechanics. Pt. II. Hydrodynamics. Pt. III. Physics
(Taylor and Walton, London, 1845).
Fig. 6. Superposition of our color triangle with the original diagrams withthe indication of the white point obtained from an analysis of Maxwell’s and
Katherine’s data, indicated, respectively, with W(J) and W(K), and from our
set of ten measurements (W
0). Maxwell’s diagrams were constructed from
the observation of all the selected colors carried out by Maxwell (b) and his
wife (a) (see Fig. S2(I)) by using a geometrical method equivalent to the cal-culation of the center of gravity (Ref. 12).
793 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Roberti et al. 793 04 October 2023 23:19:04
4J. Clerk Maxwell, “Experiments on colour, as perceived by the eye, with
remarks on colour-blindness,” Trans. R. Soc. Edinburgh 21, 275–298
(1855).
5The Scientiﬁc Papers of James Clerk Maxwell , edited by W. Niven (Dover
Publications, New York, 1890), Vol. II, pp. 273–274.
6B. Mahon, The Man Who Changed Everything: The Life of James Clerk
Maxwell (John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, 2003), p. 90.
7The Scientiﬁc Letters and Papers of James Clerk Maxwell (1862–1873) ,
edited by P. Harman (Cambridge U.P., Cambridge, 1990), Vol. II, p. 146.
8J. Clerk Maxwell, “On the theory of compound colours, and the relationsof the colours of the spectrum,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London 150, 57–84
(1860).
9I. B. Hopley, “Clerk Maxwell’s experiments on colour vision,” Sci. Prog.48(189), 46–66 (1960), available at https://www.jstor.org/stable/43424831 .
10H. von Helmholtz, Treatise on Physiological Optics (Trans. J. P. C
Southall, Dover Publications, New York, 1962), Vol. II, p. 63.
11L. Rayleigh, “Experiments on colour,” Nature 25, 64–66 (1881).12See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/10.1119/
5.0087786 for more details on Maxwell’s original method to detect wave-
lengths (S1) and Maxwell’s color chart’s determination (S2). Furthermore,
see Secs. S3, S4, and S5 of the supplementary material for some insightsabout the choice of the components and geometrical construction of the rep-
lica, the determination of our scale in comparison with Maxwell’s original
one, and the realization of our color diagram, respectively. In Sec. S6, a list
of the required components and approximate prices can be found.
13H. von Helmholtz, “Ueber die Thatsachen, die der Geometrie zum Grundeliegen,” Nachr. von der K €oniglichen Gesellschaft Wissenschaften
G€ottingen 1868 , 193–221 (1868).
14B. Riemann, “Ueber die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde
liegen,” Abhandlungen K €oniglichen Gesellschaft Wissenschaften
G€ottingen 13, 133–150 (1868).
15The CIE colour system, ﬁrst published in 1931, is the most popular system
of colour representation in use today and considered the basis of modern
colorimetry.
794 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 Roberti et al. 794 04 October 2023 23:19:04
