
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkINSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| MARCH 01 2022
Measuring the speed of light using optical feedback from a
picosecond diode laser 
Abdulaziz M. Aljalal
Am. J. Phys.  90, 21 1–217 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0007144
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Speed of light measurement with a picosecond diode laser and a voltage-controlled oscillator
Am. J. Phys.  (December 2022)
Michelson interferometry with a diode laser
Am. J. Phys.  (May 2022)
A pulser circuit for measuring the speed of light
American Journal of Physics  (September 1987) 04 October 2023 23:04:27
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
The downloaded PDF for any Note in this section contains all the Notes in this section.
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, and
how they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to theIL&D editor for consideration.
Measuring the speed of light using optical feedback from a picosecond
diode laser
Abdulaziz M. Aljalala)
Physics Department, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
(Received 1 May 2021; accepted 21 October 2021)
An experiment for measuring the speed of light by measuring the distance between regularly
generated optical pulses is described. The experiment utilizes optical feedback from a visiblepicosecond diode laser to accurately determine the distance between two successive laser pulses.
The required setup is compact, and it does not implement either a fast detector or an oscilloscope.
This experiment is suitable for an undergraduate physics instructional laboratory course or as anindependent student project.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics
Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0007144
I. INTRODUCTION
The speed of light in vacuum cis one of the most impor-
tant physical constants. The ﬁrst successful attempt to mea-sure cdates back to 1675, when Roemer used the eclipses of
the innermost moon of Jupiter for estimating the travel time
of light across the diameter of Earth’s orbit.1Over the years,
many different techniques have been developed to determinethe speed of light with increasing accuracy. However,since1983, the International System of Units has ﬁxed cto
be 299 792 458 m s
/C01, and the meter is deﬁned as the dis-
tance traveled by light in vacuum during a time interval of 1/
299 792 458 of a second.2Although the speed of light is no
longer measured for metrological purposes, measuring sucha very high speed is still instructive and appealing for under-graduate physics students.
3–15
There are many methods available to physics undergradu-
ates for measuring the speed of light, most of which involvemeasuring the delay time of a light pulse over a certain dis-tance or the time delay within an intensity-modulated light
beam. These techniques differ in the way they generate the
light pulse or the intensity-modulated light beam, as well asin the way they measure the delay time. In 1849, Fizeaucleverly used a slotted rotating wheel to generate light pulsesand, at the same time, to measure their time delays.
3In 1862,
Foucault, whose method is still implemented in physicsteaching labs, instead used a rotating mirror.4,5Among mod-
ern ways of generating short light pulses are a pulsed laser,6,7
a pulsed light emitting diode,8,9and a continuous wave laser
with an acousto-optic modulator10or a Pockels’s cell.11The
time delay of a light pulse is usually measured using a lightdetector with an oscilloscope,6–10but the delay can also be
measured using a light detector with a multichannel ana-
lyzer.11An intensity-modulated light beam can be produced
by modulating the injection current of a laser12–14or a light-
emitting diode,15–18or by using a Doppler-modulated
laser.19Typically, the modulation frequency is high (on the
order of tens of MHz).4The time delay or the phase shift
within the modulated light beam is usually measured by con-
verting the detected high-frequency modulated signal into alow-frequency signal accessible to a simple oscillo-scope,
13,14,16–18a loudspeaker,12or a voltmeter.15The con-
version is accomplished by multiplying the detected signalwith an electric reference signal of frequency very close to
the modulation frequency. The low-pass ﬁltered output is a
signal of frequency equal to the difference between the mod-ulated and the reference signals.
In pedagogical use, an experiment based on measuring the
delay time of a light pulse is simpler conceptually for stu-dents to understand than the one based on measuring the
phase shift of an intensity-modulated light beam. To obtain a
reasonable accuracy in the speed of light measurement withlight pulses, one needs either to use long distances
3or fast
detectors connected to fast oscilloscopes.6For a typical
teaching laboratory, long distances are not a good option ornot available, and fast oscilloscopes are quite expensive.
This work describes a compact setup for determining the
speed of light to an accuracy of 0.03% without the need forfast detectors or oscilloscopes. When a beamsplitter reﬂects
a beam of a picosecond laser to the laser, optical feedback
can occur and, as a result, it can alter the average power of
211 Am. J. Phys. 90(3), March 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 211 04 October 2023 23:04:27
the laser. Feedback occurs when the distance between the
laser and the beamsplitter is an integer multiple of half thedistance between successive laser pulses. Thus, the timebetween two picosecond laser pulses can be determined bymeasuring the distance between the laser and the beamsplit-ter. Using slow detectors to measure fast optical pulses iscommonly employed in autocorrelators, which map ultrafastoptical pulses into the spatial dimension by using nonlinearmedia instead of feedback.
II. EXPERIMENT
Figure 1shows a schematic diagram of the setup for mea-
suring the speed of light. It consists of a picosecond diodelaser, two mirrors, a beamsplitter on a linear translationalstage, two adjustable irises, a focusing lens, and a photodi-ode. The mirrors and the beamsplitter are mounted onkinematic mounts. The setup can be ﬁtted in a space of2m/C20.5 m. A beam from the laser is guided by the two mir-
rors, M1 and M2, to beamsplitter BS. The beamsplitter par-tially reﬂects the laser beam back to the laser and transmitsthe rest of the beam through lens L to photodiode PD. Thelaser generates picosecond pulses of a typical full width athalf maximum (FWHM) of 50 ps at a frequency off¼80 MHz. Thus, the width of the laser pulse is 15 mm and
consecutive pulses are separated by c=f¼3.75 m.
If the distance between the beamsplitter and the laser at
position 1 is equal to half of the distance between two con-secutive pulses, 1 :875 m, then the back-reﬂected pulse from
the beamsplitter arrives at the laser just when the laser isgenerating its next pulse. This optical feedback disturbs thepulse generation process and alters the average power of the
laser, which is monitored by photodiode PD. Since, in this
design, the PD only monitors the average optical power, aslow-response photodiode is adequate for the purpose ofobserving the effect of the feedback. The linear stage LS isused to examine the effect of the optical feedback with a sub-millimeter resolution. However, the precise distance that cor-responds to the time between two consecutive pulses isdifﬁcult to determine from examining the feedback at onlyone laser position. This imprecision is due to the difﬁculty inaccurately measuring the distance between the light source(i.e., the diode within the laser body) and the outer body ofthe laser; this distance is denoted as xin Fig. 1.B yexamining the feedback at another laser position, the
unknown distance xcan be eliminated. For example, at posi-
tion 2, the laser is separated from the beamsplitter by about
the distance between two consecutive pulses and the back-
reﬂected initial pulse arrives at the laser at the time when the
laser is generating its next pulse. The speed of light in air v
can be determined from
v¼2Dx
LþDxs ðÞ f: (1)
Here, DxLis the distance between position 2 and position 1
of the laser, and Dxsis the distance between the beamsplitter
positions when the feedback signal is maximum for the laser
at position 2 and for the laser at position 1. DxLis measured
by a meter stick, and Dxsis measured from the number of
steps of the linear stage’s stepper motor.
It is important to ensure that the laser beam does not move
laterally when the laser is moved from position 1 to position
2. Figure 1shows that, in both positions, the base of the laser
mount is pushed against a two-meter stick ﬁxed on the table.
The laser beam is sent to a distant wall, and the pitch and
yaw angles of the laser are adjusted so that the laser spotlocation on the wall does not change signiﬁcantly for the two
laser locations.
The incident laser beam must be parallel to the axis of
translation of the linear stage to ensure that the reﬂectedbeam always falls back on the laser as the beamsplitter is
translated along the linear stage. A line parallel to the axis of
translation can be found easily by the following procedure.
Iris R1, iris R2, and the beamsplitter are removed, and then
one of the irises is mounted on the mount of the beamsplitter.
The iris size is made slightly smaller than the laser beam size
to help to center the laser through the iris. The iris is trans-lated to the farthest left of the linear stage, and then mirror
M2 is used to align the incident beam through the center of
the iris. Next, the iris is translated to the farthest right of the
linear stage, then mirror M1 is used to align the incident
beam through the center of the iris. The previous two align-ment procedures are repeated until no further adjustments
are needed to pass the incident beam through the center of
the iris. At this point, the incident beam is parallel to the
translation axis and the iris can be replaced by the beamsplit-
ter. Typically, it takes roughly 10 min to ﬁnd a line parallelto the translation axis. Next, the two irises are centered along
the aligned incident beam to deﬁne a line parallel to the axis
of translation of the linear stage for future alignments. It is
helpful to place iris R1 as close to mirror M2 as possible to
decouple the angular and lateral spatial alignment.
The components used in our setup are as follows, where
the speciﬁc models we used were mostly because they are
already available in our lab; other affordable alternatives
might be used instead. Diode laser DL is a commercial pico-
second diode laser system consisting of a head (LDH-P-C-
650, PicoQuant) and driver (PDL 800-B, PicoQuant). Ahomemade picosecond diode laser is a less expensive alter-
native, which can be built with the modest budget of a few
hundred dollars.
20,21The PicoQuant laser emits a collimated
beam of 50-ps pulses at repetition rates up to 80 MHz at a
wavelength of 657 nm with an average power up to 6 mW.To operate the laser at 80 MHz, the laser driver must be
externally triggered since the maximum repetition rate the
driver can produce internally is 40 MHz. An 80-MHz crystal
clock oscillator (IQXO-821, IQD) with a frequency stability
of 25 part per million (ppm) is used for the external trigger.
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the setup for measuring the speed of light with
picosecond diode laser DL and slow photodiode PD. The reﬂection frombeamsplitter BS can disturb pulse generation, making the power of the laser
strongly dependent on the distance between the laser and the beamsplitter
when the laser is operated below the threshold. Mirrors M1 and M2 and
irises IR1 and IR2 are used to align the laser beam parallel to the axis of lin-
ear stage LS. Two-meter stick MS is used to measure the distance between
position 1 and position 2 of the laser. Lens L is used to focus the laser into
photodiode PD.
212 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 212 04 October 2023 23:04:27
Photodiode PD (DET36A, Thorlabs) has an active area of
3.6/C23.6 mm2, and its current is ampliﬁed by a transimpe-
dance ampliﬁer (DLPCA-200, Femto). Since only a slow
response is measured, the transimpedance ampliﬁer can be
replaced by a resistor of appropriate value that does notcause detector saturation. The two mirrors (BB1-E02,Thorlabs) and the 50/50 beamsplitter (BSW10, Thorlabs) aremounted on kinematic mirror mounts (KM100, Thorlabs).
The linear stage LS (NST150/M, Thorlabs) has a travel
length of 150 mm and is motorized by a stepper motor. The
stage is controlled by a LabVIEW code using a data acquisi-
tion device (USB-6002, National Instruments) and a steppermotor driver (DRV8824, Pololu). The experiment can becarried out without much difﬁculty using a manual linearstage. However, using computerized control and data acqui-sition facilitates the experiment and may provide a good
exercise for advanced students to learn more about control-
ling stepper motors and automated data acquisition. Table I
lists the costs of the items used in the setup; without the pico-second laser and the motorized linear translation stage, thesetup costs less than $1000.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Diode lasers are very sensitive to optical feedback.
22
Optical feedback occurs when a partially reﬂecting surface
reﬂects part of the laser beam back to the laser itself. If thelaser is operated above the threshold, the disturbance due tooptical feedback from a movable reﬂecting surface can bedetected over distances much wider than the width of the
laser pulse. This feature stems from the fact that the opticalfeedback from the tail of the pulse is large enough to cause adisturbance. For example, a pulse with a FWHM duration of50 ps extends over 15 mm, but the disturbance due to opticalfeedback can be observed over distances much larger than15 mm. The laser threshold can be determined from the plotof average laser power vs laser injection current. Figure 2
shows the detector signal (which is proportional to the laserpower) as a function of the setting of the laser intensitypotentiometer (which is proportional to the laser injectioncurrent). The threshold potentiometer setting occurs around6.8. The beamsplitter is removed from the laser path whentaking the measurements in Fig. 2.
The disturbance of the laser power as the beamsplitter is
translated on the linear stage is shown in Fig. 3(a)for differ-
ent settings of the laser intensity potentiometer. The laser is
positioned at 1.9 m from the center of the translation stage.These disturbances occur only when the laser distance fromthe beamsplitter is such that the back-reﬂected pulse fromthe beamsplitter arrives at the laser diode while the laser isgenerating a new pulse. This fact can be easily checked bymoving the laser to another position or translating the beams-plitter on the linear stage. For example, at the potentiometersetting of 7.0, the laser power is not disturbed by reﬂectedpulses when the linear stage position is larger than 120 mmand the disturbance due to optical feedback extends over adistance range of 110 mm. This range of 110 mm is muchlarger than the 15-mm FWHM of the laser pulse. As theinjection laser current is reduced below the threshold current,the disturbance due to the optical feedback becomes nar-rower and more symmetric. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the signal
has a FWHM of about 1 mm, which is 1/15 narrower thanthe FWHM of a typical laser pulse produced above thethreshold. Hence, the location of the beamsplitter on the lin-ear stage that causes the back-reﬂected pulse to return to thelaser diode at the time of generating a new pulse can bedetermined with an accuracy of a fraction of a millimeter.Even at this level of optical power, the laser is still visible ina well-lit room.
A similar signal to that shown in Fig. 3(b) is obtained
when the laser is moved to position 2 of Fig. 1, but it is
obtained at a slightly higher setting of 6.36 for the laserintensity potentiometer. This is because the divergence ofthe laser beam causes the intensity of the back-reﬂectedpulses to be weaker upon return to the laser, when the laseris further away from the beamsplitter. Half the distancebetween two consecutive pulses can be found accurately bysumming Dx
L, which is the distance between laser positions
1 and 2, and Dxs, which is the distance between the positions
of the beamsplitter on the linear stage when the detector sig-nal is maximum for the laser at positions 1 and 2, respec-tively. This distance is found to be 1873 :060:5 mm with the
main contribution in the uncertainty coming from the mea-surement of the distance between laser position 1 and 2. It isinstructive for students to check that the 25-ppm uncertaintyin frequency of the driving crystal clock oscillator can beignored relative to the uncertainty in the distance measure-ment, which is 0.5/1873.0 /C25270 ppm. Hence, the measured
speed of light in air according to Eq. (1)isv¼2/C21:8730ð
60:0005Þ/C280/C210
6m=s¼2:996860:0008 ðÞ /C2108m=s
¼2:9968/C2108m=s60:03%. Since pulses are used in the
measurement, the value measured is the group speed of lightin air. However, the difference between the group speed andTable I. Bill of materials.
Item Description Make Price
1 Picosecond laser Head LDH-P-C-650, PicoQuant $10 000
Driver PDL 800-B, PicoQuant
2 Clock oscillator IQXO-821, IQD $103 Photodiode DET36A, Thorlabs $1304 Linear stage NST150/M, Thorlabs $25005 Data acquisition card USB-6002, National Instruments $3006 Stepper motor driver DRV8824, Pololu $107 Kinematic mirror mounts KM100, Thorlabs $40 /C22
8 Beamsplitter BSW10, Thorlabs $1009 Mirrors BB1-E02, Thorlabs $80 /C22
Fig. 2. The detector output versus the setting of the potentiometer of the
laser driver PDL 800-B that controls the laser intensity. The inset is a magni-
ﬁed portion the ﬁgure for the laser output below the threshold.
213 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 213 04 October 2023 23:04:27
the phase speed of light in air is relatively small, and both
speeds are within the error bars of the measured value. At awavelength of 657 nm, the refractive index of air is1.000 276, and the group refractive index is 1.000 284.
23The
expected value of the group speed of light in air 2 :997 07
/C2108m/s can be calculated by dividing the speed of light in
vacuum 2 :997 925 /C2108m/s by the group refractive index.
The average laser power needed for the speed of light
measurement is rather low and should not pose a risk to theuser. For example, the average power when the laser potenti-ometer is set at 7.0 is about 0.3 mW; when set at 6.24, as inFig.3(b), the average power is about 5 lW. According to the
laser safety classiﬁcation, a visible-light laser beam with apower less than 0.39 mW is rated class 1 and it is safe forlong-term intentional viewing. However, since this laser candeliver up to 6 mW, which is rated class 3B, users should bewarned of the risk of direct exposure of the laser beam to
their eyes when the laser is operated well above threshold.
An autocorrelator provides one method for characterizing
picosecond laser pulses. In this method, the laser beam issplit into two beams, which are then sent into a nonlinearcrystal to generate a beam with double the frequency of thelaser, the second-harmonic signal. The shape of the laserpicosecond pulse can be extracted from the measurement ofthe intensity of the second-harmonic signal as a functionof the path difference between the two beams.
24,25The width
of the peak of the second harmonic signal for 50-ps pulses isabout 30 mm, which is about twice the spatial-width of thepicosecond pulse itself. An autocorrelator setup can also
measure the speed of light from the change in path distance
needed to observe two peaks of the second-harmonic signal,where one peak is due to the correlation between a laserpulse and itself and the other peak is due to the correlationbetween two successive laser pulses. The speed of light isfound by multiplying this change in path distance with thefrequency of the laser pulses. Since the width of the twopeaks determining the distance in an autocorrelator setup isabout 30 times wider than that in a back-reﬂection setup, anautocorrelator setup should be less precise in measuring c.I n
addition, the optical alignment in an autocorrelator setup is
more difﬁcult in comparison to a back-reﬂection setup.
The optical feedback can disturb the process of generating
pulses within the laser. In a typical diode laser, a short laserpulse can be generated by gain switching, in which the gainis switched on and off by driving the laser with a short cur-rent pulse. The injection current produces free electrons inthe conduction band and free holes in the valence band of
the active layer of the laser. A photon can be emitted sponta-neously or by stimulated emission when a free electron
recombines with a free hole; stimulated emission is responsi-
ble for the optical gain of the laser. If gain saturation isneglected, the rate of stimulated emission per photon gðnÞ
can be approximated by the following expression:
gnðÞ¼g
0n/C0n0 ðÞ : (2)
Here, nis the free electron density and n0is the electron den-
sity at which the active layer becomes transparent and g0is
the differential gain coefﬁcient.27
The main features of gain switching can be explained
qualitatively by the rate-equation approximation of a single-mode laser.26The rate equations are derived by balancing
the total number of free electrons with the total number of
photons within the diode laser. The number of free electronsis assumed to be equal to the number of free holes. The rate
equations for the free electron density nand the photon num-
ber density sare the following:
dn
dt¼I
eVa/C0gnðÞs/C0n
sn; (3)
ds
dt¼CagnðÞs/C0s
sphþCabspn
ssp: (4)
Here, Iis the current injected into the laser, eis the elemen-
tary charge, Vais the volume of the active layer, snis the
free electron lifetime, sphis the photon lifetime, sspis the
photon spontaneous emission lifetime, bspis the spontaneous
emission coupling factor into the laser cavity, and Cais the
optical conﬁnement factor of the active layer. Ca/C17Va=Vm,
where Vmis the mode volume. The free electron density
n/C17thetotalnumberof freeelectronsinthelaserðÞ =Vaand the
photon number density s/C17thetotalnumberof photonsð
inthelaser Þ=Vm. In Eq. (3), the ﬁrst term represents the
increase in the rate of the photon density due to the injectioncurrent, while the second and the third term represent thedecrease in the rate due to the simulated emission and the
lifetime of the free electrons, respectively. The ﬁrst term in
Eq.(4)is the increase in the rate of photon density due to
the stimulated emission, while the second term is the
decrease in the rate due to the lifetime of photon within the
laser cavity. The third term is due to spontaneous emissionalong the laser cavity, and it can be usually ignored since
Fig. 3. (a) The detector output as a function of the position of the beamsplitter on the linear translational stage for different laser intensity poten tiometer set-
tings when the laser is 1.9 m from the beamsplitter. The detector output is proportional to the average laser power, i.e., the time average over many pul ses. The
curve for the potentiometer setting of 6.24 is redrawn in (b).
214 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 214 04 October 2023 23:04:27
the spontaneous emission coupling factor bspis very small
(on order of 10/C04).27
One needs to be familiar with some concepts related to the
continuous-wave operation of a diode laser to appreciate
gain switching. In order for the output of a continuous wave
laser to be constant, the current must be kept constant forsufﬁcient time for the device to reach steady state. In steady
state, dn=dt¼0 and ds=dt¼0. According to Eq. (4), for
low injection currents, where the gain C
agnðÞis less than the
loss 1 =sph, the photon number does not build-up and the pho-
ton number density is practically zero within the laser cavity,
i.e.,s¼Cabspn=ssp1=sph/C0Cag/C0/C1/C2/C3/C250. The gain increases
with the injection current until it becomes equal to the loss.The current for which the gain just becomes equal to the lossis the threshold current, which can be found from the rate
equations to be I
thr;ss¼eVa=sn ðÞ 1=g0Casph ðÞ þn0/C0/C1.27The
subscript ssstands for steady state. For higher currents, the
gain does not increase anymore, but it stays equal to the loss.
By Eq. (4), if the gain exceeded the loss, the photon number
density would increase with time, contradicting the steady-state assumption. Thus, for a steady-state operation and cur-rents above the threshold current, the free electron density is
ﬁxed at its value at the threshold current and, therefore, it is
called the steady-state threshold electron density, n
thr;ss. The
extra free electrons injected by the current to the cavity are
converted into laser light, and the laser output becomes pro-
portional to the current.
Equation (3)and(4)are nonlinear in the variables nands
and are typically solved numerically. Figure 4shows a solu-
tion for Eqs. (3)and(4)when a rectangular current pulse is
applied to a diode laser. In the beginning, the electron den-
sity or the gain starts to increase at a rate proportional to theheight of the current pulse. While the electron density is less
than its steady-state threshold value, the gain is less than the
loss, and the photon density within the laser cavity is practicallyzero. Once the electron density exceeds its steady-state thresholdvalue, the gain becomes higher than the loss, and therefore the
photon density starts to build up. However, it takes several cav-
ity decay times for the photon density to reach its steady-statevalue. Meanwhile, the gain continues to increase. After reaching
its steady-state value, the photon density becomes large enough
to consume the extra electron density above the steady-statethreshold value, and the electron density starts to decrease.However, the gain is still higher than the loss, and the process of
increasing the photon density continues until the electron density
reaches its steady-state threshold value. When the electrondensity becomes less than its steady-state threshold value, the
loss becomes larger the gain and the photon density decrease
quickly to zero. Thus, a sharp light pulse much narrower than
the current pulse is generated. If the current is switched off atthis point, the gain or the current density drops exponentially tozero, and no more pulses are generated. Otherwise, the electron
density can increase above its steady-state threshold value again,
resulting in another light pulse of smaller amplitude. For a verywide current pulse, more pulses may be generated before reach-
ing the steady-state values for the current density and photon
density.
28
The optical feedback signal can be included in the rate
equations by adding to Eq. (4)a source term representing the
rate of increase in the photon density due to the back-
reﬂected signal. The time delay between the back-reﬂected
signal and the emitted laser signal is 2 l=c, where lis the dis-
tance between the laser and the beamsplitter. The time thelight needs to traverse a laser of an optical length disd=c.
Hence, the rate at which the photon density increasing due to
the back-reﬂected signal is c
0=d=cðÞ st/C02l=c ðÞ . Here, c0is a
coupling coefﬁcient that includes the coupling out of the
laser, back from the beamsplitter and into the laser again. To
simplify the form of the equation, c0=d=cðÞ is replaced by
c=sph. The optical length of the laser dis about 1 mm, and it
is about 15 times smaller than the FWHM of the optical
pulse. The rate equations that include the optical feedback
from the back-reﬂected signal are:
dn tðÞ
dt¼I
eVa/C0g0ntðÞ/C0n0 ðÞ stðÞ/C0ntðÞ
sn; (5)
ds tðÞ
dt¼Cag0ntðÞ/C0n0 ðÞ stðÞ/C01
sphstðÞ
þc
sphst/C02l
c/C18/C19
þCabspn
ssp: (6)
In general, these equations are difﬁcult to solve. However
since the time between the emitted and the reﬂected laserpulses is at about 12.5 ns, which is long enough for the tran-
sients in the photon and electron densities to die away, one
can use the optical signal emitted during a previous currentpulse for the back-reﬂected pulse for the next current pulse.For the ﬁrst current pulse after switching the laser on, there
is no back-reﬂected signal. Hence, one can solve the rate
equations numerically. For the second current pulse, the pho-ton signal obtained from the ﬁrst current pulse is used in the
back-reﬂected term, allowing the rate equations to be solved
numerically. The process is repeated for the following cur-rent pulses until, hopefully, the change in the photon densityfunction from one pulse to the next is negligible. The supple-
mentary material
29contains a Mathematica code for
calculating the photon density function for the ﬁrst elevencurrent pulses. In the following calculations, a rectangular
current pulse of a width of 0 :2 ns is used with the following
numerical values: V
a¼10/C010cm3;n0¼1018cm/C03,g0¼20
/C210/C06cm3=s,sn¼1 ns, sph¼2 ps,Ca¼0:3,c¼0:35, and
Cabsp=ssp¼10/C04=sn. These values are close to the typical
values of a diode laser.26
The height of the current pulse that corresponds to the
threshold for pulse generation is higher than the thresholdcurrent I
thr;ssfor continuous wave operation. Figure 5(a)
shows the energy of the emitted optical pulse versus the
height of the current pulse, which is expressed in the units ofthe steady-state threshold current I
thr;ss. The threshold value
Fig. 4. Laser pulse generation by gain switching.
215 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 215 04 October 2023 23:04:27
depends on the width of the current pulse, and for a current
pulse width of 0 :2n s;the threshold occurs at 6.05 Ithr;ss. The
energy of the optical pulses is found from the area under the
curve of the photon density function, which is found by solv-
ing the rate equations Eqs. (3)and(4).
Figure 5(b)shows the generation of the ﬁrst two pulses just
after switching the laser on, when the height of the current
pulse is below threshold at 5.74 Ithr;ss. Unlike the continuous-
wave operation, in which the gain is always lower than the
loss below the threshold, in the pulse operation below thethreshold, the gain can exceed the loss for a short time at the
end of the current pulse causing a faster photon density
growth rate. The gain becomes higher than the loss when the
electron density exceeds its steady-state threshold value, and
the sum of the ﬁrst two terms on the righthand side of Eq. (6)
becomes positive. For the generation of the ﬁrst pulse, there
is no feedback signal, and the rate of the growth of the photon
density is the sum of the ﬁrst two terms and the last term,
which is due to the spontaneous emission and is always posi-tive. For the second pulse, the growth rate of the electron den-
sity increases more due to the back reﬂection represented by
the positive third term of Eq. (6).
Figure 6shows the energy of the ﬁrst few optical pulses just
after switching the laser on as a function of the displacementof the beamsplitter for two different heights of the current
pulse, Fig. 6(a)the threshold at 5 :74I
thr;ss,a n dF i g . 6(b)at the
threshold at 6 :05Ithr;ss. The numbers beside the curves repre-
sent the pulse number. The zero in the displacement-axis corre-sponds to the location of the beamsplitter when the distance
between the beamsplitter and the laser is cT,w h e r e Tis the
time between two successive current pulses. The energy isobtained from the area under the curve of the photon densityfunction, which is found by solving the rate equations Eqs. (5)
and(6). The ﬁrst pulse has no back-reﬂected pulse, and there-
fore, its energy is not affected by the displacement of thebeamsplitter.
In Fig. 6(a), the maximum of the pulse energy occurs at a
displacement of about /C00:8 mm. This small shift from zero
displacement for the location of the maximum energy does
not affect the speed of light measurement because it is can-celed by a similar shift occurring when the laser is located atposition 2 of Fig. 1. At the displacement of maximum pulse
energy, the feedback pulse arrives at the laser slightly earlier
than the usual time for generating a laser pulse without feed-back, as shown in Fig. 5(b). Due to the build-up time, the
laser pulse generated without feedback reaches its peak value
slightly after the electron density or the gain reaches its max-
imum value. The highest growth rate of the second pulse
Fig. 5. (a) Optical pulse energy as a function of the height of a 0.2 ns-wide rectangular current pulse. The laser threshold occurs when the height of the current
pulse is about 6.05 of the steady-state threshold current Ithr;ss. (b) Pulse generation below the threshold, when the height of the current pulse is 5.74 Ithr;ss.A t
the end of the pulse, the electron density for a short time exceeds its steady-state threshold value. During this time, the gain is higher than the loss a llowing the
photon density to grow faster.
Fig. 6. The optical pulse energy of the ﬁrst few laser pulses as a function of the displacement of the beamsplitter. The numbers beside the curves indica te the
pulse number. The zero on the displacement-axis is for the location of the beamsplitter when it is at a distance cTfrom the laser, where Tis the time between
two successive current pulses. (a) Below the threshold, the height of the current pulse is 5.74 Ithr;ss, and (b) at threshold, the height of the current pulse is
6.05 Ithr;ss.
216 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 216 04 October 2023 23:04:27
occurs when the peak value of the feedback pulse arrives at
the laser when the gain is maximum, as shown in Fig. 5(b).
The subsequent pulses grow at different rates. Figure 6(a)
shows that the energy of the pulses is still growing up topulse number 11. A few more pulses are needed for theenergy change from one pulse to the next to be practicallynegligible. The measurement of the energy of the pulses isnot affected by the pulses’ energy build-up at the beginning,which takes a fraction of a microsecond, i.e., much shorterthan the detection time. At the threshold, Fig. 6(b), the maxi-
mum of the optical pulse energy curve also occurs at a smallnegative displacement, and the optical pulse energy practi-cally stops growing beyond pulse number 10.
There is a fair qualitative agreement between the simula-
tion in Fig. 6obtained using a simple single-mode rate equa-
tions model and the measurements shown in Fig. 3. Students
can use the rate equations to explore the effects of different
laser parameters on the pulse generation, the threshold, andthe shape of the energy versus displacement curve. Forexample, a super Gaussian current pulse can be used insteadof a rectangular current pulse. Also, it would be interestingto explore the effect of the strength of the feedback on theshape of the energy versus displacement curve experimen-tally and use the rate equations to model the acquired data.In this work, a 50/50 beamsplitter is needed to provide apowerful signal to the detector and at the same time to havea strong signal fed back to the laser, but other beamsplitterratios might work and even give better results.
IV. CONCLUSION
A relatively compact setup that can be ﬁt into a space of
2/C20.5 m
2is presented for measuring the speed of light. The
measurement has an accuracy of 0.03% and agrees withthe expected value of the speed of light in air. The setup usesthe disturbance due to optical feedback from a picoseconddiode laser operated below the threshold to accurately deter-mine the distance that corresponds to the time between twoconsecutive laser pulses. The time between pulses can befound from the frequency of the clock triggering the laser.Without the picosecond laser and the motorized linear trans-lation stage, the setup costs less than $1000. Also, it is possi-ble to reduce the cost of the laser and the linear stageconsiderably if a homemade laser and a manual translationstage are used.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Deanship of Scientiﬁc
Research at King Fahd University of Petroleum & Mineralsunder the Research Group Grant No. RG181004. The authoris grateful to Mr. Samer Qari for his help in the experimentand Dr. Khalil Harrabi for the picosecond laser.
a)Electronic mail: aljalal@kfupm.edu.sa
1J. H. Shea, “Ole Rømer, the speed of light, the apparent period of Io, the
Doppler effect, and the dynamics of Earth and Jupiter,” Am. J. Phys. 66,
561–568 (1998).2P. Giacomo, “The new deﬁnition of the meter,” Am. J. Phys. 52, 607–617
(1984).
3O. Morizot, A. Sell /C19e, S. Ferri, D. Guyomarc’h, J. M. Laugier, and M.
Knoop, “A modern Fizeau experiment for education and outreachpurposes,” Eur. J. Phys. 32, 161–168 (2011).
4LeyBold, “Determining the velocity of light by means of the rotating-
mirror method according to Foucault and Michelson-measuring the image
shift as a function of the rotational speed of the mirror” <https://www.ld-
didactic.de/literatur/hb/e/p5/p5611_e.pdf >.
5Pasco, “Speed of light experiment” <https://www.pasco.com/products/
complete-experiments/waves-and-optics/ex-9932 >.
6K. Aoki and T. Mitsui, “A tabletop experiment for the direct measurement
of the speed of light,” Am. J. Phys. 76, 812–815 (2008).
7A. Ronzani, F. Maccarrone, and A. Di Lieto, “Measuring light speed with
a modulated laser,” Eur. J. Phys. 29, 957–965 (2008).
8M. E. Ciholas and P. M. Wilt, “A pulser circuit for measuring the speed of
light,” Am. J. Phys. 55, 853–854 (1987).
9LeyBold, “Determining the velocity of light in air from the path and transit
time of a short light pulse” <https://www.ld-didactic.de/literatur/hb/e/p5/
p5621_e.pdf >.
10J. A. Deblaquiere, K. C. Harvey, and A. K. Hemann, “Time-of-ﬂight mea-
surement of the speed of light using an acousto–optic modulator,” Am. J.
Phys. 59, 443–447 (1991).
11F. D. Becchetti, K. C. Harvey, B. J. Schwartz, and M. L. Shapiro, “Time-
of-ﬂight measurement of the speed of light using a laser and a low-voltageP€ockels-cell modulator,” Am. J. Phys. 55, 632–634 (1987).
12G. Pegna, “An extraordinary tabletop speed of light apparatus,” Am. J.
Phys. 85, 712–720 (2017).
13Lambda Scientiﬁc Systems, Inc, “Measurement of speed of light”
<https://lambdasys.com/uploads/LEOI-24.pdf >.
14PhyWe, “Measuring the velocity of light” <https://www.phywe.com/
experiments-sets/university-experiments/measuring-the-velocity-of-light_10175_11106/ >.
15R. E. Crandall, “Minimal apparatus for the speed of light measurement,”
Am. J. Phys. 50, 1157–1159 (1982).
16E. G€ulmez, “Measuring the speed of light with a ﬁber optic kit: An under-
graduate experiment,” Am. J. Phys. 65, 614–618 (1997).
17M. B. James, R. B. Ormond, and A. J. Stasch, “Speed of light measure-
ment for the myriad,” Am. J. Phys. 67, 681–684 (1999).
18LeyBold, “Determining the velocity of light with a periodic light signal at
small distances” <https://www.ld-didactic.de/literatur/hb/e/p5/p5631_e.pdf >.
19L. Bernal and L. Bilbao, “Speed of light demonstration using Doppler
beat,” Eur. J. Phys. 39, 035704 (2018).
20J. A. Tatum, J. W. Jennings, and D. L. MacFarlane, “Compact, inexpen-
sive, visible diode laser source of high repetition rate picosecond pulses,”
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 63, 2950–2953 (1992).
21W. Uhring, C.-V. Zinta, and J. Bartringera, “A low cost high repetition
rate picosecond laser diode pulse generator,” Proc. SPIE 5452 , 583–590
(2004).
22J. Ohtsubo, Semiconductor Lasers Stability, Instability and Chaos
(Springer, New York, 2008).
23RefractiveIndex.info Refractive index database <https://refractiveindex.
info/?shelf ¼other&book ¼air&page ¼Borzsonyi >.
24J. A. Armstrong, “Measurement of picosecond laser pulse widths,” Appl.
Phys. Lett. 10, 16–18 (1967).
25T. D. Donnelly and C. Grossman, “Ultrafast phenomena: A laboratory
experiment for undergraduates,” Am. J. Phys. 66, 677–685 (1998).
26G. P. Agrwal and N. K. Dutta, Semiconductor Lasers (Kluwer Academic,
New York, 1993), pp. 238–293.
27T. Numai, Fundamentals of Semiconductor Laser (Springer, New York,
2015), pp. 101–280.
28O. Svelto, Principles of Lasers (Springer, New York, 2010), pp.
337–338.
29See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/10.0007144 for a Mathematica code that uses Eqs. (5)and
(6)to calculate the photon density function for the ﬁrst eleven current
pulses.
217 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 217 04 October 2023 23:04:27
