
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkJULY 01 2023
Memories of a mid-20th century electrical measurements
laboratory and its instrumentation 
Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr . 
Am. J. Phys.  91, 510 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0155766
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Comparing catastrophes: The influence of impacts and timelines on prioritising crises
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023)
A Study on Evacuation Performance of Siphon ‐ Type W ater Closets
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2010)
Velocity measurement and flow field simulation of a sit-type water closet
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2012) 04 October 2023 22:53:26
Memories of a mid-20th century electrical measurements laboratory
and its instrumentation
Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr.a)
Department of Physics, Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio 43022
(Received 23 April 2023; accepted 23 April 2023)
There was a time when undergraduate physics majors took a junior-level course in Electricity and
Magnetism, accompanied by a semester of laboratory work, learning to make precision electricalmeasurements. This laboratory experience is long gone, replaced by coursework in digital and
analog electronics. Even the latter has been downplayed in favor of a course in the use of digital
computers to solve problems in physics. In this article, I will discuss the course that I took as anundergraduate at Amherst College in the late 1950s and then taught as a young faculty member at
Kenyon College in the late sixties. I was a participant in the demise of the E&M laboratory and the
rise of the ensuing vacuum tube and digital electronics course. I will concentrate on the precisionapparatus, which is presently living out its life in the dusty back shelves of apparatus closets. This
may help new faculty members to answer the perennial question: It is attractive, but what is it and
how was it used?
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0155766
I. INTRODUCTION
I remember with great fondness the afternoons I spent in
the fall of 1957 as a student in the junior-year electrical mea-
surements laboratory, located in the beautiful red brick
Richardson Renaissance-Revival physics building at
Amherst College. I can still recall the ﬁerce joy of making
high-precision electrical measurements using—by today’sstandards—simple instruments, many of which were made in
the early years of the 20th century by the ﬁrms of Leeds &
Northrup of Philadelphia and General Radio of Cambridge,Massachusetts. Many of these instruments were still in use in
the mid-1960s, when I began my teaching career at Kenyon
College. While I never became a research physicist, eithertheoretician or experimentalist, I became an historian of
physics apparatus, and that has inspired me to collect, photo-
graph, and write about the wonderful mahogany and gleam-ing Vulcanite
TMblack boxes that we used in that laboratory.
In this article, I will describe that apparatus and the measure-
ments that were made with them.
In a world that has long since disappeared, my 1959 class
of about 300 men was part of the 1000 all-male student body
at Amherst. Of these, there were 17 physics majors, a fairly
large number at the time. One-sixth of us went on to medical
school and became physicians. An equal number went to law
school. A few of us went to graduate school in a wide varietyof disciplines. As far as I know, I was the only one in my
class to become a professor of physics at a liberal arts
college.
We came to the junior-year Electricity and Magnetism
course with a slender background in both physics and experi-
ment. As ﬁrst year students, we had taken the required
Science 1–2 course taught by Arnold Arons.
1Following that,
all science majors took a semester course in general physics
in the spring of our sophomore year. The Arons course had
relatively little laboratory work, whereas the sophomorecourse had a signiﬁcant lab component. Even then, we were
allowed in the lab only one day each week for just two hours,
so we had to arrive well-prepared and organized. It was atthis time that I learned to write laboratory reports and to
compose them on a typewriter!Here is the catalogue description of Physics 53, Electricity
and Magnetism, taught by Professor Theodore Soller in the
fall semester of our junior year: “Fundamentals of electrical
and magnetic measurements, and fundamental direct- and
alternating-current theory including bridge methods and cou-
pled circuits. Three hours of lecture and discussion and one
laboratory period per week. [The lab periods were at least
three hours in length.] A concurrent registration in theJunior-level Mechanics course is required.” In the spring
semester, we took the second half of the course, where we
learned about vector methods, potential theory, electrostat-
ics, induced emfs, Maxwell’s equations, electromagnetic
waves, and Poynting’s theorem; however, that course had no
laboratory component. My memory is that many of its gaps
were ﬁlled in by the concurrent Wave Phenomena course,
which had a splendid laboratory component, mostly in
optics.
II. THE INSTRUMENT MANUFACTURERS
Most of the pieces of apparatus described in this article
were made by the Philadelphia ﬁrm of Leeds & Northrup
(L&N). The ﬁrm was founded in 1903 when Edwin Finch
Northrup (1866–1940) joined the Morris E. Leeds Company,
which was started by Leeds in 1899. As an Amherst gradu-
ate, I have long been interested in Northrup, a member of the
Amherst class of 1891. He received his doctorate in physics
from Johns Hopkins University in 1895, and for a time was a
professor of physics at the University of Texas. He then
moved back to Johns Hopkins, where he was an assistant to
Professor Henry A. Rowland, who was working on a duplex
printing telegraph. After L&N was dissolved in 1910 (thename continued until the company merged with General
Signal Corporation in the second half of the 20th century),
Northrup became a faculty member at Princeton University.
Morris Evans Leeds (1869–1952) graduated from
Haverford College in 1888, and after a stint of school teach-
ing, joined the scientiﬁc apparatus company of James. W.
Queen & Co. This company, headquartered in Philadelphia,
was the largest maker, importer, and seller of science appara-
tus in the United States at that time. In 1892, he left Queen
510 Am. J. Phys. 91(7), July 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 510 04 October 2023 22:53:26
and moved to Germany, where he took courses in physics
and mathematics at the University of Berlin. Before return-ing to Queen, he visited the major European apparatus com-
panies. When he returned to Philadelphia in 1899, he
discovered that Queen was foundering and bought out theassets of the Elmer C. Willyoung & Company, a majormaker of apparatus for electrical measurements. He founded
Leeds & Company that year and served as the president of
L&N from 1903 to 1939. He also served as president ofHaverford College and was involved in the management ofthe Philadelphia public schools.
Leeds & Northrup apparatus is most attractive with pol-
ished mahogany boxes and gleaming vulcanite top plates. If
you remove the top of a piece of L&N apparatus, you canimmediately see the electrical joints, which are covered withsmooth, round pools of solder. The company employed acorps of women to do this meticulous work.
General Radio (GR) was founded in the Boston area is
1914. At that time, interested amateurs were beginning to
build radio receiving apparatus and to experiment with cir-cuits, and the company manufactured apparatus for radio fre-quency (rf) measurements. The entry of the U.S. into the
Great War in 1917 produced an uptick in business due to the
need for apparatus for battleﬁeld communication. By the late1930s, GR produced a wide range of instruments, and someof it quite specialized, for rf, audio and electrical analysis.
Apart from one important instrument and a few resistance
boxes, I saw very few pieces of General Radio (GR) appara-
tus in the electrical measurements laboratory at Amherst.The bulk of the apparatus was made by L&N, an observationthat I conﬁrmed when asked to assess the older physics appa-ratus holdings at the College in 2017.
III. THE GALVANOMETER AND ITS USES
We came to the laboratory knowing that a galvanometer
was a device responding to the most minute currents. Likemost students we had a theoretical, but not a practical knowl-
edge of how a basic meter movement worked.
2We knew
how to convert a galvanometer into an ammeter by connect-ing a shunt across it: A low-resistance device that allows
most of the current to bypass the meter. We also knew how
to use a multiplier to convert a galvanometer into a voltme-
ter; this high-resistance element, connected in series with themovement, absorbed most of the potential drop applied tothe circuit. I have not taught the introductory physics courseand its accompanying laboratory for many years, but in my
long experience as a teacher of electronics, I found that these
simple concepts are rarely grasped by students at ﬁrst.
Our ﬁrst experiment in Physics 53 was an investigation of
the use and characteristics of our primary measuring instru-ment, the L&N wall-mounted galvanometer (Fig. 1). These
were mounted on the solid outside wall of the building, so
that when a door was slammed, they were unaffected. In awall galvanometer, a rotatable coil is suspended from aboveby a thin ﬂat steel ribbon that carries the current to the coil,
and a weak helical spring below the coil that completes the
circuit. The axis of the coil is perpendicular to a magneticﬁeld that is provided by well-aged permanent magnets.When a current passes through the coil it experiences a tor-
que, which is opposed by a counter-torque supplied by the
spring. The magnitude of the current is proportional to theangle through which the coil rotates. (Even today, this basicgalvanometer movement lies at the heart of all moving coilelectrical instruments.
2) The coil is wound on a form made
of thin copper, and eddy currents induced in this conductoras it rotated interact with the ﬁeld of the permanent magnetsto damp out unwanted oscillations. Attached to the front ofthe galvanometer is an optical device for reading it. Figure 2,
taken from the 1903 L&N catalogue, shows a curved scalethat is viewed through a telescope after its image is reﬂectedby a tiny mirror attached to the moving parts of theinstrument.
Wall galvanometers were made with various sensitivities;
in one model made in the early 20th century by L&N, a cur-rent of 50 pA was sufﬁcient to move the imaged spot on thescale a distance of one millimeter. In the 1903 L&N
Fig. 1. Wall-mounted current galvanometer with its cover removed.
Fig. 2. Scale and telescope arrangement for a wall galvanometer, from the
1903 Leeds & Northrup catalogue.
511 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr. 511 04 October 2023 22:53:26
catalogue, the model 2200 wall galvanometer was listed at
$45. I have examined a great many L&N wall galvanometersand have found few with their fragile suspensions still intact.Replacement suspensions must have been best-sellers! At
one point in my junior year, I wanted to know which way my
galvanometer would swing when a small voltage was appliedto it. I was approaching my station, battery in hand, fullyintending to touch it only brieﬂy to the galvanometer termi-
nals, when my instructor, a man in his late ﬁfties, camespringing across the lab and tackled me!
For many applications, a more robust galvanometer was
needed. The instrument in Fig. 3, dating from 1931, cost
about $150. In the picture, the top has been opened so that
the mechanism can be seen. The image of the ﬁlament of the
light bulb on the right-hand side is focused by a small lensonto the mirror of the galvanometer module on the left and isthen reﬂected onto the glass scale at the right.
IV. WHEATSTONE’S 1843 BAKERIAN LECTURE
Not only did we have lab notes, run off on a mimeograph
machine, we also had a laboratory manual: Advanced
Laboratory Practice in Electricity and Magnetism by Terry
and Wahlin, which was ﬁrst published in 1922.
3Amherst
had a stack of these and signed them out to us for the semes-ter. I actually have the very copy that I used in 1957; someyears ago Robert Romer, a long-time editor of this journal,sent me my copy, which I prize.
There were other contemporary laboratory manuals that
we could have used to learn about basic measurements, but
the best, and ﬁrst source, was the Bakerian Lecture that
Charles Wheatstone delivered in 1843, entitled “An accountof several new instruments and processes for determining theconstants of a voltaic circuit.”
4The Bakerian Lecture has
been given almost every year since it was founded by HenryBaker in 1775, and the list of presenters contains manynames that would be recognized easily by students.
5Today,
Wheatstone’s paper is readily available on-line and is emi-
nently readable. If students were to read it and absorb all ofits contents, they would be fully informed about the lore ofdirect current measurements.
One of the instruments described in the lecture is a rheo-
stat, or variable resistance. Wheatstone’s rheostat (Fig. 4)i s
based on the observation of Georg Simon Ohm (1789–1854)that a wire of uniform cross section has a resistance propor-tional to its length. In Wheatstone’s rheostat, uninsulated
brass wire with diameter 0.01in. was wound from a wooden
(insulating) cylinder onto a parallel metal cylinder that shortcircuits the turns. The effective length of wire is, thus, thatremaining on the insulating cylinder. The length of the
remaining wire can be read from a scale between the cylin-
ders and a dial at the end of one cylinder.
Wheatstone used a copper wire, one foot in length and
0.071 in. in diameter, as a standard resistance. This wire, or a
longer one of the same material and diameter, served to cali-brate the rheostat. An unknown sample was connected in
series with a source of EMF and an uncalibrated galvanome-
ter, and the reading of the galvanometer noted. The unknownwas then replaced by the rheostat, and the wire was wound
onto or from the insulating cylinder until the galvanometer
reading was the same. The rheostat then had the same resis-
tance as the unknown.
All students in an electrical measurements lab know how
to calculate the net resistance of two resistors in parallel. In
his lecture, Wheatstone may have been the ﬁrst person to
introduce the concept of a divided circuit: Current ﬂowing
into a pair of resistors in parallel is split into two parts thatadd up to the original value. Today, the net resistance of par-
allel resistors is derived in all introductory physics textbooks,
but there is no reference to Wheatstone’s work.
V. WHEATSTONE’S AND CHRISTIE’S BRIDGE
In his lecture, Wheatstone also described a method used to
measure resistance that had been suggested by SamuelHunter Christie ten years earlier in his study of induced
emf.
6This is the familiar Wheatstone bridge, with four resis-
tances arranged on the sides of a diamond, and a sensitivegalvanometer connected across one diagonal and a battery
across the another. (I have read the Christie paper and found
it rather tough going, mainly because he did not have thevocabulary to describe his apparatus and the phenomena
clearly; this is hardly surprising, since Faraday had discov-
ered electromagnetic induction only three years earlier.)
Figure 5, reproduced from the lecture, shows the original
form of the bridge. Lengths of wire 0.05 in. in diameter formthree sides of the bridge network. The segments a-Zanda-C
are the same length and material. The segment d-b-e is a
Fig. 3. Box galvanometer in the Greenslade collection.
Fig. 4. Wheatstone’s rheostat.
Fig. 5. Wheatstone’s bridge diagram from his Bakerian lecture.
512 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr. 512 04 October 2023 22:53:26
continuous wire with a sliding contact at b, which adjusts the
electrical length of either b-eorb-d.The battery is connected
between points Cand Z, and the galvanometer between
points aandb. At ﬁrst, jumper wires close the gaps c-dand
e-f, and the sliding contact at bis moved until the galvanom-
eter reads zero. The jumper wires are then replaced by arheostat and an unknown resistance. Without moving thesliding contact, the rheostat is adjusted until the bridge is
rebalanced, indicating that the unknown has the same resis-
tance as the rheostat. Today, we use a different sequence ofoperations, but the circuit remains the same.
The slide-wire bridge in Fig. 6is electrically similar to the
bridge described in the Bakerian lecture. The two portions ofthe slide wire (left and right of the traveling contact) serve as
two arms of the bridge, and the unknown and standard resis-
tances R
xandRsform the remaining arms. The slide-wire
has a length L¼1000 mm. The bridge is balanced when
Rx=Rs¼x=L/C0xðÞ , where xis the position of the contact.
This bridge is in my collection and I keep it in my well-
ventilated garage because of the residual mercury in the con-
tact cups. In the ﬁrst L&N catalogue, published in 1903, itwas offered as the “Improved Meter Bridge” at a cost of $60.Later the price went up to $115, and it was no longer offeredby 1920.
We assembled Wheatstone bridges from individual com-
ponents, but commercial Wheatstone bridges were also
available. Figure 7shows the classic Post-Ofﬁce Pattern
Wheatstone Bridge, often used by students. It was designedand used by the English Post Ofﬁce and is shown in the veryﬁrst L&N catalogue from 1903, still bearing the name of
Morris E. Leeds, the parent company. The aim was to pro-
duce a quality bridge at a low price ($40) by using standardparts made in great quantities. Tapered copper plugs wereinserted or removed to form an adjustable standard resistor.The ratio arms are non-reversible and are adjusted to 0.1%,
while the resistors in the rheostat section are good to 0.2%.To aid the student, the circuit is engraved on the top plate,
and there are tap switches in series with the battery and gal-vanometer. Pressing the ﬁrst one connects the battery to the
circuit, and the second one was temporarily depressed while
the initial adjustments were made to the balance of thebridge. This reduced the risk of blowing the galvanometeroff its hinges! This design was copied or sold by otherAmerican apparatus makers (Ziegler, Knott, Welch, ChicagoApparatus and Cenco) into the second half of the 20thcentury.
In addition to learning about precision electrical measure-
ments as an undergraduate, I worked with a Wheatstone
bridge as a graduate student. My thesis research on the ther-mal conductivity of superconducting thin ﬁlms in the early1960s used 1.10 W Allen-Bradley carbon resistors as ther-mometers. To measure their resistance, I used a bridge builtfrom top-of-the-line components.
VI. THE BALLISTIC GALVANOMETER
The ballistic galvanometer shown on the left of Fig. 8was
used at Amherst in only one experiment: to plot the hystere-sis curve of soft iron. Here, we used a Rowland Ring , shown
in the center of Fig. 8, which is a ring of iron, 9 cm in the
mean diameter, with two coils wound on it to form a simple
transformer. This device was developed in the latter years ofthe 19th century by Henry Augustus Rowland (1848–1901)of Johns Hopkins University. The primary coil of heavy wireis wrapped around the entire circumference of the ring, whilethe secondary coil, made of many turns of ﬁner wire, coversa short sector of the ring. Since there are no pole faces, the
ﬁeldsB,H, andMare constant within the ring, which sim-
pliﬁes the data analysis signiﬁcantly.
An electric current is passed through the primary coil to
set up the Hﬁeld. It is suddenly turned off, inducing an emf
in the secondary coil E¼/C0 dU=dt;where U¼BAandAis
the cross-sectional area of the ring. The secondary is con-nected to the ballistic galvanometer, which has a wide coil
with a large moment of inertia, so that it is not deﬂected
appreciably during the duration of the current pulse. Thus,the current delivers a torsional impulse to the galvanometercoil, which acts as an electro-mechanical integrator: Themaximum rotation of the coil is proportional to the totalchange of ﬂux BA. Note that, because of the galvanometer
coil’s large moment of inertia, it is difﬁcult to stop its move-
ment at the start of the experiment; this is done by shortingthe coil and letting eddy currents do their work.
As an undergraduate, I remember a lot of ﬂipping of knife
switches in sequence to do the experiment, but a decade
Fig. 6. L&N slide-wire Wheatstone bridge from the Greenslade collection.
Fig. 7. L&N post ofﬁce box in the Greenslade collection.
Fig. 8. Apparatus for drawing a hysteresis curve. The switch is by Cenco,
the galvanometer is ca. 1927 from L&N, and the Rowland Ring is by
Gaertner. All are from the Greenslade collection.
513 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr. 513 04 October 2023 22:53:26
later, my Kenyon students used the automatic switching
device on the right-hand side of Fig. 8. This was ﬁrst
described by Professor A.W. Smith of the University of
Michigan in 1932.
A ballistic galvanometer could also be used to measure
the magnetic ﬁeld of the Earth. We did not do this atAmherst, but after I discovered the piece of apparatus shown
in Fig. 9, I used it in the Electricity and Magnetism course
that I taught at Kenyon College in the late 1960s. The appa-ratus in the ﬁgure is an Earth Inductor , more properly called
Delzenne’s Circle after its inventor, Charles Eduard
Delzenne (1776–1866).
7It is simply a ﬂip coil used to mea-
sure the magnitude and direction of Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld.The rotatable coil is quickly ﬂipped through 180 degrees,and the output fed to a ballistic galvanometer. With its long
period of oscillation, the galvanometer measures the total
charge delivered by the induced emf, which is proportionalto the magnitude of the magnetic ﬂux threading the coil. The
experiment is done with the coil horizontal or vertical to ﬁnd
the corresponding component of the ﬁeld.
VII. THE POTENTIOMETER
A potentiometer is the ultimate voltmeter. While it can be
slow and clumsy to use, it can measure potential differences
without drawing any current from the circuit under test. Ineffect, it acts as a voltmeter with an inﬁnite impedance. Thebasic potentiometer circuit is shown in Fig. 10,t a k e nf r o m
Ref. 3. [In the lower right-hand corner, you can see a small
equation that I wrote on my copy of Ref. 3in the fall of 1957.]
In the ﬁgure, the object labeled Bis the working battery,
typically several volts. It sends a steady current through theresistance Cand the resistance between points MandN.
This resistance is a very long slide wire of uniform cross sec-
tion wound on a drum. The device labeled Sis astandardcell(more on this later). The key point here is that the cell is
never called upon to produce any more than a minute amountof current, so that the output voltage is unaffected by the
cell’s internal resistance. When the standard cell is switched
into the circuit, the slide wire is adjusted to position ‘
1where
the sensitive galvanometer Gindicates the passage of zero
current. The emf of the standard cell, thus, bucks the emfpresented by the potential drop across the slide wire betweenpoints NandL.
The switch is now thrown to put an unknown emf Xinto
the circuit and the slide wire adjusted so that, once more, nocurrent is indicated by the galvanometer. The length of thewire on the slide wire is now ‘
2. The unknown emf is given
in terms of the standard cell by X¼S‘2=l1ðÞ . In actual prac-
tice, one does not use the equation, as the potentiometerreads voltage directly.
The potentiometer in Fig. 11is a L&N type K model that
joined the product line in 1905. For the ﬁrst half of the 20thcentury, this was the Rolls-Royce of potentiometers. Thewire drum was made of marble and the wire was laid in a
helical track cut into the drum. The potentiometer was direct
reading, so no calculations were needed to determine theunknown emf. When this instrument was manufactured in1909, it sold for $210. (Of course, you also needed a sensi-tive galvanometer.) The K in the model name paid homageto Friedrich Kohlrausch (1840–1910), one of the early devel-opers of the device in the 19th century.
I last used a L&N Type-K potentiometer in 1968 for a
study of thermoelectric power. I needed to measure emfs inthe microvolt range. The wire drum resistance could be readto ten parts in a million.
A Kohlrausch-type potentiometer measures electrical
potential in terms of the emf produced by a standard electro-lytic cell (Fig. 12). This form of standard cell was developed
by Edward Weston in the latter years of the 19th century. Ituses zinc and mercury electrodes immersed in zinc and
Fig. 9. Delzenne’s circle (earth inductor) by Elliot of London, in the
Greenslade collection.
Fig. 10. Potentiometer circuit from Terry and Wahlin.
Fig. 11. Type K potentiometer by L&N.
514 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr. 514 04 October 2023 22:53:26
mercury sulphates and has a characteristic emf of 1.0183 V
at 20/C14C. The Carhart-Clark cell in the ﬁgure was made by
Queen of Philadelphia and sold for $15.00 in the late 19th
century. Henry S. Carhart was a professor of physics at theUniversity of Michigan, and these cells were made in his lab-oratory under his own supervision. This example was the
237th made and was given to me at my 50th Amherst
College reunion in 2009.
VIII. RESISTANCE BOXES AND PRECISION
RESISTORS
The resistance box has long been a staple of electrical
measurements laboratories. When we assembled aWheatstone bridge out of discrete components, we used
resistance boxes much like the one in Fig. 13, ﬁrst made by
L&N in 1908. They were hard to use, because shorting plugshad to be inserted into the spaces between stout blocks ofbrass to put a resistance into the circuit. The instrument in
the ﬁgure can be set to values ranging from 1 to 9999 Xandis amazingly heavy because of the large amount of brass on
the top.
Soon L&N had patented resistance boxes that used
rotary switches to select desired values. The four-dial boxin Fig. 14must have been a best seller. It cost $40.00 in the
1920s. Each dial had ten settings, so that there was never ablank value when switching from one decade to another.The accuracy was stated to be 0.1%. Like so many L&Ninstruments, the base was made of mahogany and the top
of polished hard rubber (vulcanite). The box was provided
with a wooden cover, and it is common to see one of theseinstruments, at the age of 100 years, looking brand new.
In the electrical measurements lab, there were standard
resistors with values ranging from 0.01 to 1000 X. These
were usually used to measure the current in a circuit by mea-suring the potential drop across them. You can recognizestandard resistors by counting the terminals. The outer twoterminals are the current leads. Just inside them are the twovoltage leads. The current leads are connected into the cir-cuit, and the voltage leads to a potentiometer. Because thepotentiometer draws no current, this four-terminal measure-ment avoids errors due to lead resistance and contact resis-tance that can corrupt two-terminal measurements.
Figure 15shows standard resistors of various values.
Figure 16shows an example of an instrument made by two
undergraduate physics students at Bucknell University. Thenominal resistance was 0.02 X. Making instruments was a
standard way of learning physics, and I have seen numerousexamples from Denison University in Granville, Ohio.
Fig. 12. Standard cell, gift of Amherst College to the Greenslade collection.
Fig. 13. Early L&N resistance box in the Greenslade collection.
Fig. 14. Four dial resistance box by L&N in the Greenslade collection.
Fig. 15. L&N standard resistors bought by Kenyon College in 1926.
515 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr. 515 04 October 2023 22:53:26
IX. STANDARD INDUCTORS AND CAPACITORS
The inductance of a coil depends only on its geometry.
Thus, one can, in principle, design a standard inductanceusing only its physical measurements and the number ofturns of wire in it. Making a standard inductance is reducedto winding coils in predictable ways on surfaces that do notshift with time. One of the more beautiful pieces of electrical
measurements apparatus is the Ayrton and Perry Variable
Self Inductor (Fig. 17), designed by physicists and electrical
engineers William Ayrton (1847–1918) and John Perry(1850–1920). Two coils, L
1ﬃL2, are wound on the surfaces
of concentric spherical surfaces and connected in series. Thewood forms are seasoned and laminated to provide maxi-mum geometrical stability. The outer (larger) coil L
1is ﬁxed,
while the inner coil L2can be rotated to vary the coupling
between the coils. When L2is turned so that its ﬁeld opposes
that of L1, the total inductance is approximately zero. When
the coils are perpendicular to one other, the total inductanceisL
1þL2. When the two ﬁelds are aligned, the inductance is
L1þL2þ2M12, where M12is the mutual inductance of the
pair. The range was from 3.5 to 42 millihenrys. This one waslisted at $125 in the very ﬁrst L&N catalogue issued in 1903.I last used one of these devices in 1957 at Amherst College,where we used it in an alternating-current bridge to measureother inductances.
Fixed capacitors also depended on geometry, plus the
dielectric constant of the material used to separate the twoplates. For some reason, 0.5 lF capacitors seemed to be rela-
tively common. These used mica as the dielectric material,
certainly because it is dimensionally quite stable.
There were two types of variable capacitors in use in the
electrical measurements laboratory. Figure 18shows a vari-
able air-spaced capacitor made by GR. A set of rotating
metal plates was interleaved with an equal number of ﬁxed
plates. Those who restore early AM radios will recognize the
form of the tuning condenser. The dial on the top indicated
the capacitance. This is a very early example of a GR instru-
ment, and probably dates from the 1920s.
L&N also made the step-wise capacitor box shown in Fig.
19. Early models used solid brass connectors mounted on the
top plate with plugs to bring various values of capacitanceinto the circuit. However, the large amount of metal added to
the effective area of the capacitor plates, and, at a later date,
the ﬁrm used the small knife switches shown in the ﬁgure.
The smaller amount of metal in the switches reduced the
effect on the overall capacitance. This model sold for $65 in1925.
X. ALTERNATING CURRENT BRIDGES
My Amherst Electricity and Magnetism course included a
segment on the theory of alternating current bridges. In prepara-
tion for this, we learned about the impedance provided by both
inductors and capacitors. This included phase relationships:The potential difference across an inductor was 90
/C14ahead of a
resistor in series with it, while the potential difference across a
capacitor lagged that of a series resistor by 90/C14. These phase
shifts complicated the process of balancing the bridge.
In one experiment, we worked with a modiﬁed
Wheatstone bridge, called a Maxwell bridge, in which a
capacitor and an inductor are added to two of the sides of the
diamond-shaped bridge circuit (Fig. 20). The circuit was
designed by James Clerk Maxwell in the late 19th century.The analysis of the circuit is straightforward and was
included in all electricity and magnetism lab manuals in the
early years of the 20th century.
The battery in the original circuit was replaced by an alter-
nating current source. In most cases, this was the “Hummer”
manufactured by GR (Fig. 21), which used a 1000 cps tuning
fork to produce a signal that was close to being a pure sinu-
soid. (Only later did we learn to replace the unit “cycles per
Fig. 16. Student-made 0.02 Xresistance standard given to the Greenslade
collection by the Colgate University physics department.
Fig. 17. Ayrton and Perry inductance standard by Leeds & Northrup in the
Denison University collection.
 Fig. 18. Variable capacitor by General Radio in the Greenslade collection.
516 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr. 516 04 October 2023 22:53:26
second” with the modern “Hertz.”) Instead of a galvanome-
ter, the detector was a pair of magnetically driven head-phones, which tended to hurt my ears. As in all AC bridges,there are twobalance conditions and that meant a lot of ﬁd-
dling to balance the bridge and reduce the volume of theaudio signal to zero. While I adjusted the resistances to bal-
ance the bridge, the 1000 Hz whine rang through my head,
and I left the lab still hearing it!
One General Radio instrument that was to be found in
almost every electrical measurements laboratory was theType 650A Impedance Bridge (Fig. 22). This was the top of
the line of the series of bridges made by GR and was pat-ented in 1928–1929. I suspect that very few university andindustrial physics labs were without this instrument, which,in my own undergraduate days and early years of teaching atKenyon College, was in constant use in the electricity andmagnetism laboratory. It was a heavy, solid instrument thatcost $175 in 1935.
For resistance measurements, the 650A was completely
self-contained with four tall 1.5 V No. 6 dry cells held in therear compartment serving as a direct current power supply.The galvanometer on the front panel indicated when thebridge was in balance. Binding posts were available for anexternal power supply and an external detector for more sen-sitivity when measuring larger resistances. Even withoutthese, one could measure from 1 milliohm to 1 megohm with
an uncertainty of only 1%. A dial whose graduations spanned12 in. in circumference increased the instrument’sresolution.
For AC measurements, a self-contained 1000 Hz Hummer,
powered by the internal batteries, supplied the alternating
signal. For inductance measurements, the dials used to bal-ance the bridge gave the inductance and the resistance of thecoil. For capacitance measurements, the capacitance and the
power factor (the ratio of the impedance to the resistance)
were indicated.
XI. CODA
At AIP’s Niels Bohr Library in College Park MD, there is
an invaluable collection of interviews with our academic
forerunners that documents the development of our ﬁeld ofphysics. The Library also has a large collection of writtenmaterials recording the ideas of our predecessors. While
these are of great historical importance, we might also
remember to preserve the instruments and apparatus thattouched their hands.
When the ﬁrst piece of vintage equipment was donated to
what would become the Greenslade Collection, I had no idea
of the number of physical artifacts that were hidden away in
physics department storerooms. I heard stories of entire col-lections being discarded to make space for newer apparatus.
Fig. 19. Leeds & Northrup capacitor with knife switches in the Greenslade
collection.
Fig. 20. Alternating current bridge circuit from Terry and Wahlin.
Fig. 21. 1000 Hz Hummer by General Radio in the Greenslade collection.
Fig. 22. General Radio model 650A impedance bridge in the Greenslade
collection.
517 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr. 517 04 October 2023 22:53:26
Fortunately, I discovered a few collections that were pre-
served at Harvard, Vanderbilt, Amherst, and other institu-tions. Today, the Greenslade Collection resides in a wingbuilt onto my house in 2005, and it contains numerous devi-ces that illustrate many important aspects of our scientiﬁcﬁeld. Among them, I saw many familiar “friends” from myundergraduate laboratory course in Electricity andMagnetism, and I decided to tell their stories in the presentarticle. When you walk into your own equipment storagerooms, I hope that you will recognize items from our pastand preserve some of them.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
a)Electronic mail: greenslade@kenyon.edu. ORCID: 0000-0002-3018-
8046.1Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr., “Arons at Amherst,” Phys. Teach. 60, 34–36
(2022).
2Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr., “Edward Weston and the ‘Modern’ galvanome-
ter movement,” Phys. Teach. 46, 162–164 (2008).
3Earle Melvin Terry and Hugo Bernard Wahlin, Advanced Laboratory
Practice in Electricity and Magnetism (McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.,
New York, 1936), pp. 41–42. This is the third edition; the ﬁrst one was pub-
lished in 1922.
4Charles Wheatstone, “An account of several new instruments and processes
for determining the constants of a voltaic circuit,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
London 133, 303–324 (1843).
5There has been a Bakerian lecturer every year from 1775 to the present.
The presenters include many familiar ﬁgures: 1837, William Henry Fox
Talbot (developer of the positive-negative photographic process); 1866,
James Clark Maxwell; 1891, George Darwin; 1941, P. A. M. Dirac.
6Samuel Hunter Christie, “Experimental determination of the laws ofmagneto-electric induction in different masses of the same metal, and of its
intensity in different metals,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 123, 95–142 (1833).
7Charles Edouard Joseph Delzenne, “Notices elementarie sur les phenom-
enes de induction,” Lille, Memoires Soc. Sci. 23, 1–132 (1844); 27, 10–160
(1847).
518 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 Thomas B. Greenslade, Jr. 518 04 October 2023 22:53:26
