
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| MAY 01 2022
Michelson interferometry with a diode laser 
Abdulaziz M. Aljalal
Am. J. Phys.  90, 373–379 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0062798
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Laser diode coherence
Am. J. Phys.  (September 2020)
Michelson in 1887
Physics T oday  (May 1987)
The Michelson Museum
American Journal of Physics  (April 1954) 04 October 2023 23:08:56
Michelson interferometry with a diode laser
Abdulaziz M. Aljalala)
Physics Department, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia
(Received 8 July 2021; accepted 31 January 2022)
A typical Fabry–P /C19erot diode laser is used to study the relationship between the laser spectrum and the
interference signal obtained from a Michelson interferometer. The interference signal is measured overa range of path length differences of a few centimeters, and the laser spectrum is obtained with a
spectrometer of a high resolution of 0.005 nm. Contrary to the laser datasheet, the laser is found to have
several longitudinal modes even at high injection currents well above the threshold current. A simple
model based on treating the laser’s longitudinal modes as pure sinusoidal waves is derived and
successfully used in modeling the complex and repetitive interference signal. The spectral spacing andthe laser cavity length can be found from the interference signal without the need to use a spectrometer,
provided that the interference signal is measured over a long enough range of path length differences.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0062798
I. INTRODUCTION
A Michelson interferometer is a standard apparatus for
studying light interference in physics undergraduate labs. Its
capability of making precise displacement measurementsmakes it an important instrument in research and industry.1–3
It is utilized widely in Fourier transform spectroscopy,4,5
optical coherence tomography,6and laser wavelength mea-
surement.7Originally, in 1887, it was used by Michelson
and Morley to show that light does not need a medium to
propagate,8a fact that paved the way to the special theory of
relativity.
In a Michelson interferometer, an incoming light beam is
split into two beams that are reﬂected back by two mirrors torecombine at the beam splitter and interfere. The optical path
difference between the two interfering beams can be adjusted
by translating either of the two mirrors. Interference, whichcan be observed as dark and bright fringes, is observed only
over a limited range of path differences. This range is a mea-
sure of the light’s temporal coherence length.
For a light source with a simple structureless spectral
shape, the temporal coherence length is inversely propor-tional to the width of the spectral shape. If the spectrum of
the light source has two close peaks of roughly equal intensi-
ties, then the visibility of interference fringes varies in a peri-odic manner with the path difference of the two interfering
beams. The range over which the interference can be
observed is inversely proportional to the spectral width ofthe individual peak and is not related to the overall width ofthe spectrum.
9,10Using his interferometer, Michelson was
able to resolve very closely spectral lines, such as the sodium
D-lines at 588.995 and 589.592 nm.11Still today, Michelson
interferometer is the most popular way to measure the sepa-
ration of the sodium D-lines in introductory university phys-
ics labs.12For a light source with narrow equally spaced
spectral lines, such as the emission from a multi-longitudinal-mode laser, the visibility of the interference as a function
of path difference can be rather complicated, but it is
periodic.
ten Bosch and de Voigt used a Michelson interferometer
to determine the number and intensity of longitudinal modes
of a 1-m-long multimode He–Ne laser. The mode intensities
were determined from the Fourier transform of the visibilityof the interference pattern in the region around zero pathlength difference, which extended over 1 m, while the mode
spacing was determined from the period of visibility, whichwas 2 m. However, the error in the measurements was rather
large at a large path length difference, probably due to the
instability of the interference pattern.
10
Compared to a typical gas laser, such as the He–Ne laser,
which has a relatively long cavity of tens of centimeters, a
diode laser has a relatively short optical cavity length of abouta millimeter. Hence, interference signal from a Michelson
interferometer over a few centimeters is enough to reveal valu-
able information about the diode laser, such as its mode spac-
ing and relative intensities of its spectral lines. M €ollmann et al.
used a Fourier transform spectrometer, which is basically aMichelson interferometer, to study the spectra of a diode laser.
The spectrum presented for the diode laser above the threshold
has one dominant laser peak with two small longitudinal side
modes, but no information about the injection current is pro-
vided. The laser cavity length is determined by three differentmethods: from a microscopic image, from the mode spacing of
Fourier transform spectra, and from interferograms obtained
from a Fourier transform spectrometer.
13Poddar et al. used
optical coherence tomography, which employs a Michelson
interferometer, to obtain resolved spectra for the longitudinalmodes of a diode laser operated above threshold, but they
observed no interference peaks below threshold.14Yet,
no detail was provided on how a maximum optical path differ-
ence of 2 /C216 mm can result in a separation of about df
/C250:03 GHz between two adjacent points in the frequency
domain, which should be, according to the Fourier transform
theory, at least df/C25c=2/C216 mmðÞ /C259 GHz.15
Diode lasers are widely available, and they are relatively
cheap. Most of the commercial diode lasers, such as those
used in laser pointers and disc players, are edge-emitting
lasers of a Fabry–P /C19erot type where the two parallel cleaved
facets of the diode are used as the laser reﬂectors.
Typically, the lateral dimensions of a low-power diode
laser are small enough that it can only support the lowest
transverse oscillation mode, but the cavity is long enough
that it can support many longitudinal modes. A longitudinaloscillation mode occurs when a standing wave is formed by
a wave that is reﬂected back and forth from the diode fac-
ets, requiring that the optical pathlength of a round trip of
the wave within the diode, 2 nl, is an integer multiple of the
wavelength k:
373 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 373 04 October 2023 23:08:56
2nl¼mk: (1)
Here, nis the index of refraction of the diode material, lis
the length of the diode, and mis a positive integer for the
mode number. A formula for the wavelength difference
between two adjacent longitudinal modes Dkcan be found
by differentiating Eq. (1)to yield 2 Dnl¼DmkþmDk. For
positive Dk,Dmshould be /C01, and eliminating mby using
Eq.(1)leads to
Dk¼k2
2ngl; (2)
where ng/C17n/C0kDn=Dk¼n/C0kdn=dkis the group index
of refraction.
For a typical diode laser operating around k¼635 nm,
using l/C25500lm, and ng/C254:5 leads to Dk/C250:1 nm. This
mode separation is much smaller than the gain bandwidth of
a diode laser, which is typically a few nanometers.
Therefore, it is not unusual for these lasers to have severallongitudinal modes oscillating simultaneously.
Unfortunately, some laser diode datasheets are misleading
with respect to the longitudinal modes. For example, the
datasheet of laser diode HL6320G from Hitachi states that itis a single longitudinal mode laser,
16although it is not. In
addition, the user of these diodes might also be misled by the
fact that their modes, which have a separation of less than
0.1 nm, cannot be resolved with typical spectrometers avail-
able in physics teaching labs. Treating a multimode laser asa single-mode laser makes it difﬁcult to interpret correctly
the interference obtained from a Michelson interferometer.
For instance, Gfroerer and Bergthold used an HL6320G laserdiode to measure interferograms from a Michelson interfer-
ometer over a scanning range of 1 mm.
17Despite their excel-
lent experimental work, they had some challenges ininterpreting some of their observations because they assumed
that the laser has only one single longitudinal mode above
threshold. Particularly, they attributed the reduction in thesignal as the mirror moves away from the zero path length
difference to mirror misalignment. Also, they determined the
mode spacing indirectly by two methods, but both seem tobe off by almost an order of magnitude. This leads to a clear
inconsistency between the measured physical length of
the laser, 700 lm, and the length calculated from the inferred
modes spacing, 100 lm. Moreover, they had difﬁcultyexplaining the shoulder appearing on some of the peaks at
high laser current.
In this work, an HL6320G laser diode is used to study
interference from a Michelson interferometer over a path dif-
ference range of 40 mm. A high-resolution spectrometer,
capable of resolving individual longitudinal modes, showsthat the laser has several longitudinal modes even at a veryhigh laser injection current. A model based on treating thelaser modes as pure sinusoidal waves is used to successfullymodel the complex and periodic interference signal. Themodel is simple enough to be understood by a student who is
familiar with interference phenomenon at the level of a ﬁrst-
year college physics course. It is also shown that that thelaser mode spacing and the laser optical length can be foundaccurately from the interference signal without the need for aspectrometer. This work may be suitable as a basis for a labexperiment or a project introducing students to diode lasersand Michelson interferometry.
II. EXPERIMENT
Figure 1shows a schematic diagram of the experimental
setup to study the interference of a diode laser light with aMichelson interferometer. The two arms of the interferome-ter are made by mirror M1, mirror M2, and beam splitter
BS1. The path difference between the two arms is adjusted
by moving mirror M2 on linear stage LS. The optical align-ments of the diode laser beam and the interferometer arefacilitated by the He–Ne laser, iris IR1, iris IR2, mirror M3,and mirror M4. Mirror M5 allows the user to switch betweena He–Ne laser and a diode laser: It is removed when the
He–Ne laser is used, while it is installed when the diode laser
is used. The diode laser DL is coupled to a single-mode ﬁber,and the light emerging from the ﬁber is collimated by anaspheric lens. Collimating the output of the single-mode ﬁberis more convenient than collimating the diode laser’s directoutput. The output beam of the single-mode ﬁber has a circu-lar Gaussian intensity distribution, while the diode laser’s
direct output has an elliptical intensity distribution, with the
two axes of the ellipse diverging at different rates. Beamsplitter BS2 directs part of the laser beam to a spectrometerso that its spectrum can be observed while its interferencesignal is recorded. The interference signal is measured withphotodiode PD that has pinhole PH in front of it.
The He–Ne laser is used for the initial optical alignment.
The incident laser beam needs to be parallel to the axis of
Fig. 1. Diagram and photograph of the experimental setup. BS ¼beam splitter, DL ¼diode laser, IR ¼iris, L ¼lens, LS ¼linear stage, M ¼mirror, PD ¼
photodiode, and PH ¼pinhole.
374 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 374 04 October 2023 23:08:56
translation of linear stage LS. For this alignment, mirror M2
is replaced with an iris, and mirrors M3 and M4 are adjusteduntil the incident beam passes through the center of the iris
at both extremes of the stage’s motion. Then mirror M2 is
reinserted and adjusted to reﬂect the incident beam nearlyback to the He–Ne laser (see below). Irises IR1 and IR2 arepositioned such that the incident laser beam passes through
their centers. Then mirror M1 is adjusted until the beam
reﬂected from it overlaps with the beam reﬂected from mir-ror M2 at the detector location. To make a good overlap, it ishelpful to use a lens to expand these two beams and observe
them on a distant wall.
If the back-reﬂected beam from mirror M2 to the laser
enters the laser cavity, it makes the laser unstable. Therefore,it is slightly misaligned such that it falls just beside the laserentrance. The angle between the incident and reﬂected beamis made small, about 0.05
/C14, by making the distance between
the laser and beam splitter BS1 about 2 m. This small mis-
alignment has only a small effect on the interference signalover path differences of a few centimeters. A more expen-sive solution for avoiding optical feedback is to use an opti-
cal isolator. The alignment of the setup can be checked by
observing the interference signal from the He–Ne laser asmirror M2 is translated over few centimeters on the linearstage. The use of the He–Ne laser in the alignment process is
not essential, but it makes the alignment easier. Also, it
allows students to observe and appreciate the differencebetween the interference signal from a light source with onesharp spectral peak and that from a light source with multi-
equally spaced spectral peaks.
To observe the interference signal from the diode laser,
mirror M5 is placed in its mount. Then, the diode laser beam
guided through the two irises, IR1 and IR2, by adjusting mir-ror M5 and the holder of lens L, which is attached to an xyzlinear stage to facilitate moving the lens in a vertical plane.
If an xyz stage is not available, the holder of lens L can be
moved manually in the vertical plane or another mirror canbe used before mirror M5.
The speciﬁc models of the specialized items used in the
setup are listed in Table I. They were chosen mainly because
they were already available in our lab, and alternative items
might be used instead.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 2shows the output power of the diode laser as a
function of its injection current at a laser temperature of
25
/C14C. The laser threshold occurs at ith/C2546 mA. We set the
laser temperature close to room temperature because thethermal coupling between the laser diode and our lasermount is not optimal. Thorlabs recommends the
CLD1010LP controller with its mount that provides better
thermal coupling to the LPS-635-FC Fiber-pigtailed laserdiode. If this controller is available, then a different tempera-ture might be used.
Figure 3(a) shows a spectrum of the diode laser operated
below threshold with an injection current of 43 mA /C250:9i
th.
It has a width of a few nm and consists of many spectralpeaks that cannot be distinguished when the whole spectrumis shown. However, individual peaks can be seen clearly in
the insert. Below threshold, the laser gain is less than the
losses within the cavity and the output is mainly due toampliﬁed spontaneous emission. The maximum and mini-mum intensities of these individual peaks can be used toobtain the optical gain spectrum of the laser.
18These peaks
appear due to interference caused by reﬂections from the fac-ets of the diode, as the diode acts like a Fabry–P /C19erot interfer-
ometer. The spacings between adjacent peaks are almostequal, and the variation of spacings over the whole spectrumis about 5%. From the mode spacing of 0.068 nm atk¼637 nm, Eq. (2)can be used to estimate the length of the
diode l¼k
2=2ngDk¼660lm, where a group index of
refraction of ng/C254:5 is used.19This length should be com-
pared with a length of 870 lm estimated from the schematic
diagram in the datasheet16and with a length of 700 lm mea-
sured for a similar diode in Ref. 17. The spectrum of a diode
laser below threshold is similar to that of a light-emittingdiode (LED) or superluminescent diode (SLD) made of thesame materials, but in the case of an LED or SLD, the backreﬂections by the facets are minimized either by coating orusing tilted facets to minimize the modulation in the spec-trum caused by the Fabry–P /C19erot effect.
Just above the current threshold, this laser might lase in
just one or two longitudinal modes, but as the injectionTable I. Models of the specialized items used in the setup of Fig. 1.
Standard optics components are also required.
Item Model (note)
Fiber-pigtailed laser diode Thorlabs LPS-635-FC (Hitachi HL6320G
laser diode coupled to a single-mode ﬁber
Fibercore SM600, emission wavelength
/C24635 nm)
Laser diode mount Thorlabs TCLDM9Temperature controller Thorlabs TED 200CCurrent controller Thorlabs LDC 205CCollimation lens Thorlabs C230TMD-AHe–Ne laser Thorlabs HRS015Linear stage Thorlabs NST150/M (driven by Pololu
DRV8824 and controlled by a LabVIEW
code and National Instrument USB-6636
data acquisition card)
Spectrometer SPEX 1403 monochromator coupled to a
line camera Alphalas CCD-S3600-UV CCD
(resolution of 0.005 nm)
Photodiode Thorlabs DET36A (a pinhole of 0.2 mm
diameter is used in front of the detector)
Transimpedance
ampliﬁerFemto DLPCA-200
Fig. 2. The output power of the ﬁber-pigtailed diode laser as a function of
the laser injection current at a laser temperature of 25/C14C.
375 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 375 04 October 2023 23:08:56
current increases, additional longitudinal modes reach the
lasing threshold as the gains of these modes become equal totheir losses. Figure 3(b) shows a spectrum of the diode laser
well above threshold with an injection current of70 mA /C251:5i
th. Contrary to the datasheet, which states that
the laser has a single longitudinal mode, there are about 14
lasing longitudinal modes present simultaneously. They areso intense that they overwhelm other nonlasing longitudinalmodes. The actual width of these peaks is much smaller thanthe apparent width in the ﬁgure, which is limited by the spec-trometer’s 0.005 nm resolution. Typically, the actual width isabout 100 MHz or 0 :0001 nm.
20
The main effects of operating the laser at a higher temper-
ature are that the threshold current increases and the longitu-dinal modes shift toward higher wavelengths. However, thelaser always has many lasing longitudinal modes if its injec-tion current is well above the current threshold.
The alignment of the Michelson interferometer is tested
by measuring the interference signal from the He–Ne laseras a function of path difference. The temporal coherence
length for a typical He–Ne laser is about 30 cm, so when the
interference signal is plotted vs. pathlength differences up toa few millimeters, the graph should be sinusoidal with a visi-bility very close to one. The visibility is deﬁned as the ratioof the difference and the sum of the maximum and minimumintensities of the interference signal.
The path length difference of the interferometer is varied
by moving the linear translating stage in 2.5 lm steps at a
rate of 1 ms per step. The rate of 1 ms per step is the highestrate the translation stage can move, and it barely stops at theend of each step. To resolve the wavelength-scale variation
in the interference signal, the detector is sampled at a rate of100 kHz, which is equivalent to 100 samples per step. A2.5-lm step corresponds to a change of 5 lm or 7.9 wave-
lengths in the path length difference. Hence, there are about
13 samples points over a path length difference of one wave-length. Using a relatively large step length and a high sam-pling rate put less demand on the speciﬁcations of therequired translation stage and reduce the acquisition time.The same step size and duration are used for measuring otherinterference signals.
Figure 4(a) shows the interference signal from the He–Ne
laser when the stage is translated by 1 mm, while Fig. 4(b)
shows an expanded portion of Fig. 4(a) that corresponds to
the interference signal taken over 1 ms, the time of one motor
step. The visibility of the interference signal is more than99.5%. The number of interference oscillations in Fig. 4(a)is
so large that they cannot be resolved, and the plot appears asa solid painted area. The oscillations in Fig. 4(b) are not uni-
form probably due to the Doppler effect, small vibrations ofthe translated mirror, and the nature of stepper motor motion.Also, due to the vibrations of the translated mirror, the num-ber of oscillations in one step, which should be 7.9 oscilla-
tions, varies from one step to another. The nonuniformity of
the periods of the oscillations in one step should not be ofgreat concern, as the main goal is to observe the maximumand minimum intensities within the step.
Figure 5shows an interference signal from the diode laser
over a path length difference range of 40 mm. The laser isoperated above threshold with an injection current of 70 mA,
Fig. 3. (a) Spectrum of the diode laser operated below threshold using an injection current of 43 mA. (b) Spectrum of the diode laser operated above thre shold
using an injection current of 70 mA. The scale of the intensity axis is adjusted such that the maximum intensity of the spectrum is about one.
Fig. 4. (a) Interference signal from the He–Ne laser over a path length difference range of 2 mm. The number of interference oscillations is so large tha t they
cannot be resolved, and the plot appears as a solid painted area. (b) Interference signal from the He–Ne laser over one step of the stepper motor used to m ove
the translation stage, which corresponds to a change of 5 lm in the path length difference.
376 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 376 04 October 2023 23:08:56
corresponding to the spectrum shown in Fig. 3(b).
Oscillations over path length differences on the order of indi-
vidual wavelengths are not resolved with the scale used inthe ﬁgure, so they create a solid-colored region. The compli-cated interference signal can be predicted accurately fromthe emission spectrum of the laser. Each lasing mode can betreated as a pure sinusoidal wave for a path length difference
much smaller than the temporal coherence length that corre-
sponds to the mode. The temporal coherence length l
cthat
corresponds to a simple spectral line with a central wave-length kand a width dkisl
c/C25k2=dk.9For a typical width of
a diode laser mode dk/C2510/C04nm, lc/C254 m, much longer
than a path length difference of a few tens of millimeters.
Denoting the modes in the laser spectrum with a subscript m,
the electric ﬁeld Emof mode mbefore the beam splitter at
position xand time tcan be written as
Emx;tðÞ¼E0mcoskmx/C0xmtþ/m ðÞ : (3)
Here, E0mis the amplitude, km¼2p=kmis the wavenumber,
xm¼2pkm=cis the angular frequency, kmis the wavelength, c
is the speed of light, and /mis a constant. Assume
the Michelson interferometer has a 50–50 beam splitter and per-fect mirrors, the electric ﬁeld EtðÞat the detector due to the two
interfering laser beams shifted by a path difference of DLis
EtðÞ¼1
2X
mEmx;tðÞþEmxþDL;t ðÞ : (4)
The factor 1 =2 is to account for the fact that each interfering
beam passes through the beam splitter twice and everytime a beam is split by the 50–50 beam splitter, its electricﬁeld is reduced by a factor of 1 =ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
to conserve energy.
LetU1
m/C17kmx/C0xmtþ/mandU2m/C17kmxþDL ðÞ /C0xmt
þ/m. The instantaneous intensity at the detector ItðÞis
ItðÞ¼ce0E2tðÞ
¼1
4ce0X
m;m0E0mE0m0cosU1mþcosU2m ðÞ
/C2cosU1m0þcosU2m0 ðÞ : (5)
Here, e0¼8:85/C210/C012F=m is the permittivity constant.
Using the trigonometric identity 2 cos acosb¼cosaþbðÞ
þcosa/C0bðÞ , the above equation can be written as the sumof terms of cosine of sum and difference of U1’s and U2’s.
For the terms proportional to the cosine of the sum, the fre-
quencies are of the order of optical frequencies, which are
too high for the detector to follow. Thus, these terms averageto zero. For m6¼m
0, the lowest frequency obtained from the
terms proportional to the cosine of the difference is when
m0¼m61, which is xm/C0xmþ1¼2pc1=km/C01=kmþ1 ðÞ
/C252pcDk=k2
m/C252p/C250/C2109s/C01. This frequency is also
too high for the detector to follow, and thus, the only terms
surviving in Eq. (5)are the terms of the cosine of the differ-
ence for which m0¼m. Hence, the intensity Idetected by
the detector is
I¼1
2X
mIm1þcoskmDL ðÞ : (6)
Here, Im¼ce0E2
0m=2 is the intensity of mode m, which is
proportional to the intensity of the mode in the laser spec-
trum. The argument of the summation, Im1þcoskmDL ðÞ ,i s
the interference signal that would be obtained if the laser had
only mode m. Thus, above threshold, the interference signal
from the diode laser is simply the sum of the interference
signals from individual modes.
Figure 6compares the measured and calculated interfer-
ence signal for the diode laser operated above threshold at70 mA. Figure 6(a) is an expanded portion of Fig. 5, while
Fig. 6(b) is the interference signal calculated using Eq. (6)
and the spectrum of Fig. 3(b). All the modes that can be
observed in the ﬁgure are included in the sum of Eq. (6).
Each mode is treated as inﬁnitely narrow mode, or a pure
sinusoidal wave, with its height representing the correspond-ing mode intensity I
min the equation. The agreement
between the measured and calculated signal is quite good. In
the measured but not in the calculated signal, one canobserve a small and slow decrease in the visibility with
increasing path length difference. This caused by small mis-
alignment of the two interfering beams and by the ﬁnitewidth of the modes, which are ignored in the calculation.
It is clear from Fig. 6(a) or from the calculation that the
shape of the interference signal repeats itself over a 6 mm
range of path length difference. This repetition can be under-
stood from Eq. (6). The argument of the cosine, k
mDL, can be
written as 2 pDL=k0þmDk ðÞ /C252pDL=k0/C02pmDLDk=k2
0,
which changes by an integer multiple of 2 pifDLis an integer
multiple of k2
0=Dk.H e r e , k0is the wavelength of one of the
modes. Thus, the shape of the interference signal shouldrepeat over a path length difference of DL¼k2
0=Dk
¼637 nmðÞ2=0:068 nmðÞ ¼6:0 mm. However, according to
Eq.(2),k2
0=Dk¼2ngl. Hence, one can determine the mode
spacing Dkand estimate the length of the laser lby measuring
the range of path length difference over which the shape of the
interference signal repeats. Another way of seeing why the repe-tition length in the interference signal and the laser cavity length
are equal is that both have similar formulas for the wavelength.
In the Michelson interferometer, constructive interferenceoccurs when the pathlength difference between the two interfer-
ing beams is an integer multiple of the wavelength; in the laser
cavity, a longitudinal mode occurs when the optical round trip isalso an integer multiple of the wavelength. Thus, the shortest
path length difference, other than zero, when all the laser modes
are in phase equals the optical round trip. The laser modes are
still in phase if this distance is multiplied by an integer.
It should be noted that the intensity of the modes drifts
slowly with time, and the measurement of the laser spectrum
Fig. 5. Interference signal from the diode laser operated above threshold at
70 mA over a path length difference range of 40 mm. Oscillations over one
wavelength path difference are not resolved in the plot, and they are shown
as solid color.
377 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 377 04 October 2023 23:08:56
should be carried out within a few minutes of measuring the
interference signal. The drift is probably caused by thechange in the room temperature. The laser temperature con-troller maintains the temperature ﬁxed at the location of thesensor itself. However, there is always a small distancebetween the diode itself and the sensor, and for the samecontroller setting, a change in the room temperature mightslightly alter the diode temperature. Also, using a mountwith a better thermal coupling might reduce this drift.
The measured and calculated interference signal for the
diode laser operated below threshold at 43 mA are shownin Figs. 7(a) and 7(b), respectively. The agreement
between the two signals is good. The thick horizontal linethat appears in the measured signal, Fig. 7(a), is due to the
noise in the signal. The noise becomes apparent becausethe signal itself is weak. Also, the visibility ar ound the
6 mm path length difference is relatively smaller forthe measured signal compared with the calculated one. Themain reason for this is that the widths of the modes areignored in the calculation. Below the threshold, the modesare measured to have relatively large widths of about0.01 nm and treating a mode as a pure sinusoidal wave is arough approximation.
Similar to the case of the above-threshold laser, because
of the presence of equally spaced discrete modes, the inter-ference pattern repeats every 6 mm of path length difference.
The overall width of the spectrum dk/C255 nm limits the range
within which interference occurs around these path lengthdifferences to about 0.1 mm. This range can be predictedfrom k
2=dk/C25637 nmðÞ2=5n mðÞ /C250:1m m :The signal in Fig. 7(b) is calculated using Eq. (6)and the
spectrum of Fig. 3(a). Finding the modes’ wavelengths and
intensities manually from the spectrum is time-consumingand might not be practical. It might be a good exercise forstudents to write a computer code to ﬁnd the central wave-length and intensity of the modes. Since the spacing betweenthe modes is almost equal, the spectrum can be divided intosmall intervals, each containing only one mode. The datapoint with the maximum intensity within an interval can befound programmatically.
A typical lab could be structured as follows. The compo-
nents of a setup like in Fig. 1are placed in their positions
ahead of the lab to save time. The students should removemirror M5 and align the Michelson interferometer using theHe–Ne laser. Then, they measure the interference signal andconﬁrm that the spectrum has only one peak. After that, theyreplace mirror M5 in its position and block one arm of theinterferometer to ﬁnd the threshold of the diode laser bymeasuring the laser power as a function of the laser injectioncurrent. With both arms unblocked, the students then shouldmeasure the spectra and the interference signals below andabove the threshold of the diode laser diode. Using the mea-sured spectra, the students can calculate the interference sig-nals and compare them with the measured ones. If theHe–Ne laser is not available, the interferometer can bealigned with the diode laser itself. Also, if a high-resolution
spectrometer is not available, spectra that can be used to cal-
culate the interference signals can be roughly constructedfrom low-resolution spectra and the knowledge of the modespacing obtained from the interference signals.
Fig. 6. (a) Expanded portion of Fig. 5, and (b) interference signal obtained using Eq. (6)and the spectrum of Fig. 3(b).
Fig. 7. (a) Measured interference signal from the diode laser operated below threshold at 43 mA over a path length difference range of 8 mm. (b) Calculat ed
interference signal using Eq. (6)and the spectrum of Fig. 3(a).
378 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 378 04 October 2023 23:08:56
IV. CONCLUSION
A typical edge-emitting Fabry–P /C19erot diode laser has many
longitudinal modes whether operated below or above the
laser threshold. Usually, these modes cannot be resolved
with typical spectrometers available in physics teaching labs.However, one needs to be aware of their presence as they arevery important to understand the interference signal obtained
from a Michelson interferometer. Even without using any
spectrometer, the interference signal alone can be used toobtain the mode spacing of the laser, provided that the inter-
ference signal is measured over a range of path length differ-
ences compatible with the mode spacing, typically one ortwo centimeters. From the mode spacing, the optical length
of the laser can be found, and its physical length can be esti-
mated. However, just above the threshold, the laser mightlase only at one mode, and hence, in this case, its cavity
length cannot be obtained from the interference signal.
Furthermore, a simple formula is derived that can predictreasonably well the interference signal as a function of the
path length difference from the laser spectrum, which is use-
ful if a high-resolution spectrometer is available.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Deanship of Scientiﬁc
Research at King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals
under Research Group Grant No. RG181004.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂict of interest to disclose.
a)Electronic mail: aljalal@kfupm.edu.sa
1K. G. Libbrecht and E. D. Black, “A basic Michelson laser interferometer
for the undergraduate teaching laboratory demonstrating picometer
sensitivity,” Am. J. Phys. 83, 409–417 (2015).
2S. H. Yim and J. Park, “Two-frequency interferometer for a displacement
measurement,” Am. J. Phys. 81, 153–156 (2013).
3D. Ugolini, H. Rafferty, M. Winter, C. Rockstuhl, and A. Bergmann,
“LIGO analogy lab—A set of undergraduate lab experiments todemonstrate some principles of gravitational wave detection,” Am. J.
Phys. 87, 44–56 (2019).
4J. C. Albergotti, “Fourier transform spectroscopy using a Michelson inter-
ferometer,” Am. J. Phys. 40, 1070–1078 (1972).
5D. R. Matthys and F. L. Pedrotti, “Fourier transforms and the use of a
microcomputer in the advanced undergraduate laboratory,” Am. J. Phys.
50, 990–995 (1982).
6Kai Pieper et al. , “Full-ﬁeld optical coherence tomography—An educa-
tional setup for an undergraduate lab,” Am. J. Phys. 88, 1132–1139
(2020).
7P. J. Fox, R. E. Scholten, M. R. Walkiewicz, and R. E. Drullinger, “A reli-
able, compact, and low-cost Michelson wavemeter for laser wavelength
measurement,” Am. J. Phys. 67, 624–630 (1999).
8A. A. Michelson and E. W. Morley, “On the relative motion of the earth
and the luminiferous ether,” Am. J. Sci. 34, 333–345 (1887).
9M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics (Cambridge U. P., Cambridge,
1999), pp. 352–359.
10J. J. ten Bosch and M. J. A. de Voigt, “Interferometric study of the modes
of a visible-gas laser with a Michelson interferometer,” Am. J. Phys. 34,
479–482 (1966).
11A. A. Michelson, “On the application of interference methods to spectro-scopic measurements,” Philos. Mag. 31, 338–346 (1891).
12M. D’Anna and T. Corridoni, “Measuring the separation of the sodium D-
doublet with a Michelson interferometer,” Eur. J. Phys. 39, 015704
(2018).
13K. M €ollmann, M. Regehly, and M. Vollmer, “Spectroscopy and micros-
copy analysis of semiconductor lasers in student laboratories,” Eur. J.
Phys. 41, 025302 (2020).
14R. Poddar, S. R. Sharma, K. Bose, P. Sen, and J. T. Andrews, “A study of
the longitudinal laser modes of a semiconductor laser using optical coher-
ence tomography,” Am. J. Phys. 74, 569–571 (2006).
15J. Kauppinen and J. Partanen, Fourier Transforms in Spectroscopy (Wiley-
VCH, New York, 2001).
16Datasheet for Hitachi HL6320G laser diode <https://html.alldatasheet.net/
html-pdf/195112/OPNEXT/HL6320G/216/1/HL6320G.html >.
17T. Gfroerer and M. Bergthold, “Laser diode coherence,” Am. J. Phys. 88,
740–745 (2020).
18B. W. Hakki and T. L. Paoli, “Gain spectra in GaAs double-heterostructure injection lasers,” J. Appl. Phys. 46, 1299–1305 (1975).
19M. Moser, R. Winterhoff, C. Geng, I. Queisser, F. Scholz, and A. Dijrnen,
“Refractive index of (AI xGa1/C0x)0.5I0.5P grown by metalorganic vapor
phase epitaxy,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 235–237 (1994); A group index of
refraction of 4.5 can be calculated for x¼0:5. Using ng/C254:5 for our laser
is an estimate as the exact composition of AlGAInP in our laser is not
known.
20C. H. Henry, “Theory of the linewidth of semiconductor lasers,” IEEE J.
Quantum. Electron. 18, 259–264 (1982).
379 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Abdulaziz M. Aljalal 379 04 October 2023 23:08:56
