
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| MARCH 01 2022
Multivalued specific heat 
Matheus G. Pacheco ; Reinaldo de Melo e Souza ; Daniela Szilard
Am. J. Phys.  90, 187–193 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0006899
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
FPGA-oriented synthesis of multivalued logical networks
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2016)
Prediction of multivalued waveforms in media with power-law attenuation
J Acoust Soc Am  (April 2016)
Multivalued Fields
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2007) 04 October 2023 23:03:44
Multivalued specific heat
Matheus G. Pacheco,a)Reinaldo de Melo e Souza,b)
Instituto de F /C19ısica, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Avenida Litor ^anea s/n, CP 24210-346 Niter /C19oi,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Daniela Szilardc)
Instituto de F /C19ısica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
(Received 18 November 2020; accepted 11 October 2021)
Speciﬁc heat is usually analyzed only for common thermodynamic processes, leaving us with the
impression that it can always be expressed as a single-valued function of temperature. In thispaper, we show that speciﬁc heat functions may be multivalued even for processes that are
mathematically simple, such as an ideal gas following a linear path with a negative slope in the
pressure–volume diagram. Although this example has been studied previously, we show that themultivalued approach provides additional physical insights, and we establish the conditions that
any path must satisfy in order to have a single-valued speciﬁc heat. As a ﬁnal application of our
approach, we demonstrate a geometric theorem.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006899
I. INTRODUCTION
Heat capacity was introduced by Joseph Black around
1760 when modern thermodynamics was being developed.1
In modern notation, we deﬁne the heat capacity Cas
CðTÞ¼ lim
DT!0Q=DT; (1)
where Qis the heat associated with a temperature change
from TtoTþDT. The heat capacity is frequently a function
of temperature.
Black deﬁned this concept empirically. However, many
important advances emerged when physicists searched for
microscopic models of matter capable of predicting the heat
capacity. A landmark development was Dulong and Petit’sempirical recognition that the heat capacity per mole—the
molar speciﬁc heat c—is the same for all solids and equal to
approximately 3 R/C2525 J/(mol K), where Ris the ideal gas
constant.2–4This universality put physicists on the path to
the discovery of the equipartition theorem and the kinetic
theory of gases and led Boltzmann to propose a model of asolid as a set of independently oscillating atoms.1,5However,
Dulong and Petit’s law must be modiﬁed at low temperatures
where thermal energies are smaller than the quantum energylevel separation, and Einstein adapted Boltzmann’s model
by treating the harmonic motion of the atoms quantum
mechanically to explain the behavior of the speciﬁc heat ofsolids at low temperatures.
6This was arguably the departure
point of modern solid state physics. While it is not the pur-
pose of this paper to present a detailed historical account, weemphasize that the route to a proper understanding of spe-
ciﬁc heat led to some unexpected and important develop-
ments, as evidenced by the cited references.
It is well known that speciﬁc heat is path dependent, but
students usually only express it for ideal gases undergoing
isobaric or isochoric processes. In these cases, the molar spe-
ciﬁc heat ccan be used to evaluate the heat exchanged
through the expression
Q¼ð
T2
T1ncd T ; (2)where nis the number of moles present. However, one must
be cautious when applying Eq. (2)for an arbitrary case, since
a multivalued speciﬁc heat function might be required. Forexample, we will show that if an ideal gas follows a path in apressure–volume diagram that is a straight line with negativeslope; then, the speciﬁc heat is multivalued as a function oftemperature. This problem has been studied in the literatureand contains many interesting features, such as a segmentwhere heat enters in the system and another where it leaves.
7
Furthermore, in this process, we have a portion where thespeciﬁc heat is negative, and also a point where it changesabruptly from /C01 toþ1.
8,9An interesting geometrical
method has been devised to ﬁnd the point where the speciﬁcheat is zero in this process.10These authors circumvented
the need to employ a multivalued function by expressing thespeciﬁc heat as a function of volume instead of temperature.However, in order to evaluate the integral in Eq. (2),w e
need to express the speciﬁc heat as a function of temperature,which is not possible using a single-valued function. Similarproblems appear for more general processes, such as ellipti-cal cycles and parabolic paths.
11,12
The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, we explore the
conditions that a path must satisfy in order to have a single-valued speciﬁc heat. The intuitive answer is that the path ontheP–Vdiagram must not be tangent to an isotherm because
the temperature changes non-monotonically when movingthrough the tangency point, frequently resulting in points onopposite sides of the tangent point that have the same tem-perature but unequal speciﬁc heats. However, a careful dem-onstration of this result is subtle, and in Sec. II, we provide
one by introducing general thermodynamic variables andemploying the implicit function theorem of basic calculus.While in analytical mechanics, it can be useful to deﬁne avariable devoid of a physical meaning (for example, thecanonical transformations), in thermodynamics, we meet thisprocedure much less frequently; our general variables pro-vide an example of this. Although present in most calculuscourses, the implicit function theorem, which underlies theoperation of implicit differentiation, is rarely applied tophysical problems, and we believe that the application pre-sented here may help students to build intuition regarding it.
187 Am. J. Phys. 90(3), March 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 187 04 October 2023 23:03:44
Our second purpose is to re-examine the straight-line exam-
ple. In Sec. III, we show that once we express the speciﬁc
heat as a function of temperature, new features can be appre-
ciated. Our results also enable us to enunciate and demon-strate a geometric theorem. Section IVoffers some
concluding remarks.
II. WHEN IS IT POSSIBLE TO DEFINE A SPECIFIC
HEAT?
In undergraduate courses, we emphasize that the speciﬁc
heat depends upon the path, henceforth denoted by P. This
is a consequence of the fact that heat is not a state variable.In a more formal way than Eq. (2), we deﬁne the molar spe-
ciﬁc heat as the function cðT;PÞsuch that
Q
i!f;P¼ðTf
TincðT;PÞdT: (3)
A good way to start a discussion with students is to ask them
to evaluate the integral in the case that Ti¼Tf. They are
likely to tell you that it is zero. Then, ask them to consideran ideal gas in the linear process depicted in Fig. 1(a), where
we choose the initial and ﬁnal states to lie on an isotherm so
that they have the same temperature. In this case, there is novariation in the internal energy of the gas (because T
i¼Tf),
and therefore, the heat lost by the gas must be equal to the
work performed on the gas in the process. The work is given
by the area below the line in Fig. 1, which is not zero, giving
a contradiction with the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics. Thiscontradiction is resolved by realizing that it is not possible to
assign a single-valued speciﬁc heat to this process. This can
be readily understood once we turn our attention to the dif-ferential form of Eq. (3),
cðT;PÞ¼
1
n:d/C0Qi!f;P
dT; (4)
where d/C0Qis the heat exchanged in an inﬁnitesimal portion
of the process and dTis the temperature variation over it. For
an inﬁnitesimal process, the speciﬁc heat is well deﬁned as
long as dT6¼0. If we represent the process in a P–Vdia-
gram, then a point around which we have dT¼0 is a point
where the path is tangent to an isotherm. For the example
depicted in Fig. 1(a), we have a tangency only at point O.I f
we consider two different points in the path with the sametemperature, they will not have the same cðT;PÞand, hence,we cannot assign a single-valued function cðT;PÞto the
entire straight line. To see this, consider two different points
with the same temperature (for example, the points iandfin
Fig.1(a)) and consider an inﬁnitesimal temperature dTalong
the process. The variation of internal energy is the same in
both cases, but the work performed by the gas is not, thus
yielding a different heat exchange in each case and, there-fore, a different speciﬁc heat. In fact, if the speciﬁc heat
were equal for a pair of points having the same temperature
around the temperature maximum, their contribution to theheat exchange would cancel, a contradiction as pointed out
above.
This argument can be generalized for an arbitrary process
connecting two points on the same isotherm, as illustrated inFig.1(b). In a few words, given any process P, we must ﬁrst
identify all the points where it is tangent to some isotherm
and then consider different speciﬁc heats, which spanbetween the tangency points. In the particular example
depicted in Fig. 1(b) we need four functions, while in
Fig.1(a)we need only two.
Although it is clear that this separation is a necessary con-
dition in order to deﬁne the speciﬁc heat, is it always sufﬁ-
cient? In order to provide a rigorous demonstration, we need
some extra tools. Henceforth, we drop the ideal gas hypothe-sis and turn our attention to a general thermodynamic systemwhose state can be uniquely deﬁned once the temperature T
and the volume Vare given; a real gas with a ﬁxed number
of particles is an example. Systems requiring more variablescan be treated by a straightforward generalization of our pro-
cedure. With this assumption, the heat exchanged in any
reversible process can be cast as
d/C0Q¼fðT;VÞdTþg
ðT;VÞdV; (5)
where fandgare state functions. To understand their physi-
cal meaning, note that when the volume is kept constant, this
formula reduces to Eq. (3)(withPbeing an isochoric pro-
cess), and therefore, f(T,V) is just the heat capacity at con-
stant volume. Analogously, gis related to a latent heat
capacity.14In order to gain more physical insight, consider
Eq.(5)for an ideal gas, where the change in internal energy
can always be written as dU¼ncvdT.15From the ﬁrst law
of thermodynamics, we can write d/C0Q¼ncvdTþPdV
¼ncvdTþnRT
VdV, where in the last step, we employed the
ideal gas equation of state. Therefore, to evaluate the heat
exchange in any processes, the speciﬁc heat at constant vol-ume can be employed, regardless of whether or not the vol-
ume is held ﬁxed. However, this will account for only one
parcel of the heat. The same is true for systems more generalthan an ideal gas, albeit with a different function g(T,V).
From now on we consider again the general case, but the
reader may always apply our results to an ideal gas to gainintuition.
Now compare Eqs. (5)and(3). In the latter, we are trying
to write the heat exchanged in terms of just one function.
The price to be paid is that now the required function is nolonger a state function but instead depends upon the path. Is
such exchange always possible? In order to answer this ques-
tion, we consider an arbitrary path deﬁned implicitly by theequation hðP;VÞ¼M, where Mis a constant.
Instead of using the pair ( T,V) as the independent varia-
bles describing the gas, we assume that it is possible to
employ alternatively the pair ( T,M) as independent varia-
bles, which uniquely deﬁne the state of the gas. In general,
Fig. 1. (a) A straight (red and blue solid) line with negative slope is tangent
to an isotherm (dashed gray curve) at T¼T0. Isotherms with T<T0, such
as the one shown for T1, intercept the line in two points. The speciﬁc heat of
the process represented by the full line must be split in two different func-
tions c1ðTÞandc2ðTÞ. (b) A more generic process connecting two points (A
and B) on the same isotherm. The gray dots on the path represent the points
of tangency to isotherms (not indicated). Each point separates one branch in
the speciﬁc heat from another. In this particular example, we have four
branches.
188 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Pacheco, Souza, and Szilard 188 04 October 2023 23:03:44
Mhas no physical meaning, and therefore, we call it a gener-
alized thermodynamic variable, a nomenclature adoptedfrom analytical mechanics. In this case, we may re-write Eq.(5)in the form
d/C0Q¼f
MðT;MÞdTþgMðT;MÞdM; (6)
where fMandgMare state functions and the index Mis added as
a reminder that they are different functions from those appearingin Eq. (5). In a process, where Mis constant, we obtain
d/C0Q¼f
MðT;MÞdT: (7)
On comparing this expression with Eq. (4), we see that fM
is nothing more than the heat capacity with Mconstant, or, in
other words, the heat capacity associated with a processhðP;VÞ¼constant. We now provide some examples. First,
for an isobaric process, M¼P. Since the pair ( T,P)u n i q u e l y
deﬁnes the system state (together with the number of moles,assumed ﬁxed), we may recognize in Eq. (7)the heat
exchange for an isobaric process in which case f
Mis just the
familiar speciﬁc heat at constant pressure, cP. As a second
example, consider an ideal gas undergoing an isothermal pro-
cess. In this case, we may choose M¼PV.S i n c e Mis propor-
tional to temperature, the pair ( M,T) does not uniquely
specify a state and, therefore, we cannot write Eq. (7)for this
process. This is natural, since the speciﬁc heat is not deﬁnedon a isotherm. This is valid regardless of the hypothesis of anideal gas, and in the general case, we will just have a differentexpression for Mas a function of pressure and volume. The
results obtained here are valid for any thermodynamical sys-tem whose state is deﬁned by two state variables; to general-ize our results for systems presenting more independentvariables, we would have to add more terms to Eq. (6).
Therefore, it is possible to deﬁne the speciﬁc heat if, and
only if, the pair ( T,M) deﬁnes uniquely the state of the sys-
tem. Expressing the pressure as a function of TandV, the
path can be recast in the form hðT;VÞ¼M. The pair ( T,M)
is sufﬁcient to furnish the state of the gas if, and only if, wecan write Vas a function of TandM. The conditions for this
to be possible are established by the implicit function theo-rem of undergraduate calculus.
13For reasonable physical
processes, this theorem requires that (there are some subtle-
ties; see the Appendix )
@T
@V/C18/C19
h6¼0; (8)that is, the temperature must vary monotonically as we per-
form the process, which is exactly the result anticipated in
the discussion following Fig. 1. In Sec. III, we develop in
more detail the example depicted in Fig. 1(a) and obtain
some unexpected results.
III. STRAIGHT LINE WITH NEGATIVE SLOPE
In this section, we illustrate the previous discussion with
the straight-line process already discussed in Sec. II, assum-
ing that the substance involved is an ideal gas. This path is
given by
M¼P/C0P0
V/C0V0; (9)
where Mis a negative constant, as depicted in Fig. 2(a).
Even though this process has more academic than practicalinterest, it provides signiﬁcant insights about conceptualaspects of thermodynamics.
7–10In this section, we present
additional perspectives on this process. Furthermore, under-
standing the speciﬁc heat in this process is useful since anysmooth path in a PVdiagram can be locally treated as a
straight line. For ideal gases and employing the sign conven-
tion that work is positive when the gas expands, we haved/C0Q¼dUþd/C0W¼nc
VdTþPdV andPV¼nRT,s o PdV
þVdP¼nRdT . From Eq. (9), we obtain dP¼MdV and then
PdV¼nRdT
1þMV
P: (10)
Substituting this result into the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics,
we ﬁnd
d/C0Q¼ncVþnR
1þMV
P2
43
5dT: (11)
One can readily verify that the particular cases M¼0 (iso-
baric path) and M¼1 (isochoric path) yield the expected
speciﬁc heats. Also, for M<0 there is always a pair ( P,V)
for which the speciﬁc heat diverges, corresponding to thepoint where the straight line is tangent to the isotherm.
This can be readily checked, since at divergence, we have
M¼/C0P=V(from Eq. (11))a n da l s o M¼dP=dVfrom Eq. (9).
Combining these gives VdPþPdV¼0 and, thus, from the
Fig. 2. (a) A straight-line process with negative slope. (b) The two branches c1ðTÞandc2ðTÞof the speciﬁc heat for an ideal gas expressed as a function of the
ratio s¼T=T0for the process depicted in part (a).
189 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Pacheco, Souza, and Szilard 189 04 October 2023 23:03:44
equation of state, dT¼0, showing that the divergence is indeed
on the point where the path is tangent to an isotherm. Our dis-
cussion in Sec. IIrevealed that this point is of special interest in
the study of speciﬁc heat, and therefore, we choose the pair ( P0,
V0)i nE q . (9)as the tangency point, that is,
P0¼/C0MV 0: (12)
Denoting the temperature of this isotherm by T0, we ﬁnd, by
employing the ideal gas equation of state,
V0¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
nRT 0
jMjs
: (13)
Substituting Eqs. (12) and(13) into Eq. (9), the equation
deﬁning the straight line process can be rewritten as
P¼MVþ2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jMjnRT 0p
¼MnRT
Pþ2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jMjnRT 0p
:(14)
This yields a quadratic equation in Pwhose solution is
PðTÞ¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jMjnRT 0p
6ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
jMjnRðT0/C0TÞp
: (15)
As expected, there are two different pressures correspond-
ing to the same temperature so long as T<T0. Employing
the deﬁnition given in Eq. (4)and substituting Eq. (12) and
the equation of state V¼nRT=Pinto Eq. (11), we obtain
(after a lengthy calculation)
c1ðTÞ¼cV/C0R1/C0ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0sp/C0/C1
2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0sp ; (16)
c2ðTÞ¼cVþR1þﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0sp/C0/C1
2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C0sp ; (17)
where s¼T=T0.c1ðTÞcorresponds to the speciﬁc heat for
pressures below P0, and c2ðTÞto that for pressures above
P0. For ideal gases, these expressions are exact. We plot
these expressions in Fig. 2(b). To this end, we shall assume
thatcvdoes not depend on temperature. This is a reasonable
assumption, valid whenever the equipartition theorem holds,
which is usually assumed in introductory courses.16The
divergence of the speciﬁc heat near the tangency point s¼1
goes as s/C01=2and, therefore, yields a ﬁnite value upon inte-
gration and consequently a ﬁnite heat exchange. The totalheat exchanged is given by Q¼Ð
T0
0n½c1ðT0Þ/C0c2ðT0Þ/C138dT0
and corresponds to the negative of the area between the
curves displayed in Fig. 2(b). The most impressive feature of
Eqs. (16) and(17) is that the speciﬁc heat does not depend
onM! Actually, this result could have been foreseen by
dimensional analysis: Since the pair M;T0uniquely deﬁnes
the straight line, the speciﬁc heat c(T) can depend only on R,
T,T0, and Mand, therefore, must be of the form RfðT=T0Þ,
which is exactly what we obtained (note that Ris contained
incV). This suggests a counter-intuitive geometrical theorem.
Consider two straight lines with different slopes tangent to
the same isotherm T0. If we take their initial and end points
to lie on the same isotherm of temperature of T1, they will
undergo the same internal energy variation. Since the heat
exchange does not depend on the slope (it does not depend
onM), then the work performed by the gas is the same in
each process, showing that the areas of the two trapezoidsdepicted in Fig. 3(b) are the same! If T1¼0, the trapezoids
become triangles. We leave as a challenge to the reader toverify this theorem by direct evaluation of the areas.
The results that we have obtained so far in this section are
equivalent those derived by Calvo-Hernandez.9However, he
expressed speciﬁc heat as a function of volume instead oftemperature. While that choice allows for a rich physical dis-cussion, we argue here that considering speciﬁc heat as afunction of temperature [in Eqs. (16) and(17)], important
additional features come to light. First, we must employ abivalued speciﬁc heat function. When one expresses thespeciﬁc heat as a function of volume in this process, asingle-valued function is found because the volume variesmonotonically. Nonetheless, if one wishes to apply thespeciﬁc heat to evaluate the heat exchanged (which is themain purpose for deﬁning speciﬁc heat), we must integrate c
along the temperature. To do so, we must either express cas
a function of temperature or change the variable of integra-tion, which would in turn lead to a separation of the integra-tion in two different parts, one before the tangency betweenthe path and the isotherm T
0and another thereafter. The
bivalued nature of speciﬁc heat for this process becomes evi-dent when cis written as a function of the temperature.
Expressing the speciﬁc heat as a temperature-dependentbivalued function also reveals several insights not availableotherwise. For example, all straight lines tangent to the sameisotherm have the same speciﬁc heat function, a feature hid-den when expressing cas a function of V. We remark that,
even though c(V) for this process does depend on M, this
does not contradict the fact that Eqs. (16) and(17) do not:
changing Mfor a ﬁxed Vgives straight lines tangent to dif-
ferent isotherms. A careful discussion of this last point canbe found in Arenzon’s paper.
12
Furthermore, note that the speciﬁc heat depends on the
temperature only through the dimensionless parameter T=T0.
In the limit T0!1 , tangent lines to the isotherm approach
either isochors or isobars. The isochors are of lower pressurethan P
0, while the opposite is true for the isobars. Hence, we
expect c1ðTÞ! cVandc2ðTÞ! cPin the limit s!0, in
agreement with Eqs. (16)and(17). This limit is equivalent to
taking T!0. In this case, for pressures lower than P0,w e
must have P!0, which in turn implies d/C0W¼/C0PdV!0
and, hence, d/C0Q!dU¼ncVdT. For pressures higher than
P0, we must have V!0 in the limit T!0, in which case,
d/C0W¼/C0PdV!/C0 nRdT , where we employed the equation
of state; this yields d/C0Q!dUþnRdT¼ncPdT.
It is important to emphasize that our results are useful
even for more generic processes. For example, suppose wewish to analyze the speciﬁc heat at some point Aof a generic
pathPin aPVdiagram. This is the same as the speciﬁc heat
of a straight-line, which is tangent to PatA. If we assume
that the slope of PatAis negative, then our Eqs. (16) and
(17) apply because a straight-line with negative slope can be
uniquely speciﬁed by furnishing the slope and the tempera-ture T
0of the isotherm tangent to it. If the volume at Ais
greater than V0given in Eq. (13), then the speciﬁc heat of P
atAis given by Eq. (17). If the temperature at Ais much
smaller than T0, then the results obtained previously for the
limit T!0 are valid, showing that this limit can be physical
in some situations.
Equations (16) and(17) possess other features worth men-
tioning. First, as shown in Fig. 2, the speciﬁc heat may
assume any value except those between cVandcP, a property
already discussed in the literature.9For pressures greater
190 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Pacheco, Souza, and Szilard 190 04 October 2023 23:03:44
than P0, an increase in temperature is always accompanied
by an increase in volume, thus demanding that heat beabsorbed and implying positive speciﬁc heat, explainingwhy c
2>0 for all temperatures: It starts from cpfor low
temperatures and increases without bound near T0.F o r
pressures lower than P0, an increase in temperature comes
with a decrease in volume. Near the tangency point, a
small increase in internal energy amounts to large workperformed on the gas and, thus, much heat must be lost,which explains why c
1ðTÞmust be negative and with a
large absolute value close to the tangency point. On theother hand, for very low pressures the opposite happens:
Negligible work entails an appreciable gain in internalenergy, requiring heat to enter the system and explainingthe positive values of c
1for small temperatures. By conti-
nuity, there is a point where c1¼0. This point corresponds
to the tangency point between the line and an adiabatic
curve and is indicated by letter Bin Fig. 4(a). Since this
point belongs to the branch with speciﬁc heat c1,Bmust
always have a lower pressure than the tangency pointbetween the same line and an isotherm, which is denotedby the letter Cin Fig. 4(a).
10
Fig. 4. The process studied in Sec. IIIa represented in (a) a PVdiagram where it is a straight line with negative slope, and (b) and (c) in a TSdiagram. In (b),
we present plots for two different examples, which are tangent to two different isotherms denoted by T01andT02. The tangency isotherms (adiabats) are repre-
sented by horizontal (vertical) lines. In (c) we plot the entropy as a function of the dimensionless parameter T=T0. The span from BtoC(inset) the speciﬁc
heat is negative. Points AandDare chosen so that their temperature is 0 :1T0.
Fig. 3. The fact that the speciﬁc heat does not depend on Mfor a ﬁxed T0leads to a geometric theorem: The blue and red patterned areas have the same numer-
ical values. In part (a), the two triangles are delimited by a segment of line tangent to an hyperbola and the axis. In part (b), the trapezoids are delimi ted by this
segment and vertical lines passing through the extreme points of the segment and the horizontal axis.
191 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Pacheco, Souza, and Szilard 191 04 October 2023 23:03:44
The temperature for which the speciﬁc heat vanishes can
readily be determined. Whenever the equipartition theorem
is valid, we may write the isochoric molar speciﬁc heat as
cv¼rR=2, where ris the number of degrees of freedom for
each molecule of the ideal gas. From Eq. (16), we see that
the speciﬁc heat vanishes when s¼sBgiven by
sB¼1/C01
ðrþ1Þ2: (18)
This result shows that a given straight line process with neg-
ative slope is tangent to an isotherm and to an adiabat at tem-
peratures whose ratio is independent of the line, i.e., the ratiois independent of both T
0and M. For a monatomic gas
(r¼3),sB¼15=16. Increasing rimplies sB!1, that is,
points BandCwould coincide. This is expected since for
r/C291;cp=cV!1 and adiabats becomes isotherms.
Physically, this is due to the fact that for r/C291 almost all
heat exchange goes into internal energy.
Valuable insights can also be gained if we analyze our
process in a entropy versus temperature diagram.17In the
remainder of this section, we shall assume a monatomic ideal
gas. The entropy as a function of temperature can beobtained from d/C0Q¼TdS¼cdT, and hence, the entropy
variation between the initial point, denoted by A, and a point
with temperature Tis given by DSðTÞ¼Ð
T
TAcðT0Þ
T0dT0. Since
we have two branches for the speciﬁc heat, we will also have
two branches for the entropy. An alternative way to obtain
S(T) is to employ the Sackur–Tetrode expression for the
entropy of an ideal gas as a function of temperature and vol-
ume and then use the ideal gas equation and Eq. (15) to
express Sas a function of Tfor the straight-line path: The
entropy diverges in the limit T!0.15We have chosen to
plot S(T) from point Aand point D, both with temperature
0:1T0, one in each branch. Without loss of generality, we set
the entropy at point Dto be zero; this is the state with mini-
mum entropy. In Fig. 4(b), we represent S(T) for two differ-
ent values of T0. They are independent of M(as long as
M<0), as expected from Eqs. (16) and(17). In the TSdia-
gram, it can be directly seen that we need two branches to
express S(and therefore the speciﬁc heat) as a function of
temperature. The branches are separated by the point C
where the process is tangent to an isotherm, depicted by a
horizontal line in this diagram. At point B, the process
achieves its maximum entropy, denoted by S0in Fig. 4(a).I n
theTSdiagram this point corresponds to the tangency
between the process and a vertical line, which denotes the
adiabat of tangency. Both processes presented in Fig. 4(b)
collapse to the same curve if we plot S=S0as a function of
the dimensionless parameter T=T0, as presented in Fig. 4(c).
Recalling that the sign of the speciﬁc heat can be obtained
from the sign of the slope of the process in the STdiagram,
we re-obtain the result commented earlier that the speciﬁc
heat is negative between BandCand positive otherwise.
IV. FINAL REMARKS
The convenience of deﬁning speciﬁc heat is that it allows
for a direct computation of the heat exchanged in going from
the initial to the ﬁnal temperature of a process. In this work,
we have analyzed what conditions a general process must
satisfy in order for us to be able to assign a single-valued
speciﬁc heat to it. The answer is that it is only required thatthe path in question not be tangent to any isotherm (assuming
that the path is smooth). However, this point is not usually
discussed in texts, sometimes leading the students to imagine
that it is always possible to assign a speciﬁc heat function foran arbitrary thermodynamic process.
We have used the implicit function theorem to provide a
rigorous derivation of the conditions that a path must sat-
isfy in order to present a single-valued speciﬁc heat func-tion. Our treatment is restricted to the case where the state
of the gas is uniquely deﬁned by furnishing just two varia-
bles, but only minor changes are required in the generalcase; one just has to introduce more generalized variables.
Finally, while our discussion here has centered on the spe-
ciﬁc heat, it applies analogously for other response func-tions as well on replacing the temperature by the
appropriate variable.
As our main example, we analyzed the speciﬁc heat of a
straight line process with a negative slope in the PV dia-gram. Since this path has one tangency point with one iso-
therm (with temperature denoted by T
0) ,w eh a dt oa s s i g n
to it a bivalued speciﬁc heat. We have shown that thesefunctions depend only on the dimensionless parameterT=T
0. The fact that the speciﬁc heat is independent of the
slope of the line (for a given T0) enabled us to enunciate a
theorem relating the areas of triangles and trapezoidsdelimited by hyperbolas. Connecting mathematical theo-
rems to physical insights can be a powerful t eaching tool,
and we invite readers to create new examples of this acrossthe breadth of physics.
18
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are indebted with Carlos Farina, Dario
Tavares, Thales Azevedo, and Thiago Rodrigues Oliveira for
valuable discussions. They also thank the Brazilian agency
CNPq for partial ﬁnancial support.
APPENDIX: IMPLICIT FUNCTION THEOREM
Here, we are concerned with the conditions, which must
be satisﬁed in order that we can (locally) invert the equation
hðT;VÞ¼Mand express it as V¼gðT;MÞ, where gis some
function. The physical intuition developed in the text sug-gests that the condition must be that the path not be tangent
to any isotherm in the point where we want to invert the
function, that is,
@T
@V/C18/C19
h6¼0: (A1)
However, what the implicit theorem function states is differ-
ent, requiring instead that13
@h
@V/C18/C19
T6¼0: (A2)
We argue that these conditions are equivalent for reasonable
physical processes. To do so, we assume without loss of gen-
erality that dV6¼0, that is, that the point of interest is not
tangent to an isochor. If dV¼0, we could use pressure
instead of the volume and the demonstration below would be
the same.
192 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Pacheco, Souza, and Szilard 192 04 October 2023 23:03:44
We ﬁrst summarize some properties among partial deri-
vates and implicit functions, which will be useful so that wecan establish our main point. More details can be found inCallen’s text.
19In an inﬁnitesimal displacement along the
path, we have dh¼0, and therefore,
@h
@V/C18/C19
TdVþ@h
@T/C18/C19
VdT¼0)@h
@V/C18/C19
T
¼/C0@h
@T/C18/C19
V@T
@V/C18/C19
h: (A3)
If the point in question is not a critical point of h, then ð@h
@VÞT
andð@h
@TÞVcannot be both zero and, hence,
@h
@V/C18/C19
T¼0()@T
@V/C18/C19
h¼0; (A4)
which is the result that we wished to establish. If we have a
critical point then we may be unable to invert the functioneven if condition (A1) is satisﬁed. However, this is an issueof more mathematical than physical interest since a criticalpoint does not appear in any reasonable physical process.Indeed, if the critical point is either a local maximum or alocal minimum of h, then we know that the level curve con-
sists of only a single point and it cannot describe anyphysical process.
13On the other hand, if the critical point is
a saddle point of h, then near the saddle point the level curve
locally corresponds to the intersection of two lines as illus-trated in Fig. 5, and a physical process could locally corre-
spond only to one of them in which case we would have noproblem inverting it.
a)Electronic mail: mgpacheco@id.uff.br
b)Electronic mail: reinaldos@id.uff.br
c)Electronic mail: daniela@if.ufrj.br
1Stephen G. Brush, The Kind of Motion We Call Heat: A History of the
Kinetic Theory of Gases in the Nineteenth Century. Volume 1: Physics and
the Atomists (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1986).
2A. T. Petit and P. L. Dulong, “Recherches sur quelques points importants
de la Th /C19eorie de la Chaleur,” Ann. Chim. Phys. 10, 395–413 (1819).
3Robert Fox, “The background to the discovery of Dulong and Petit’s law,”
Br. J. Hist. Sci. 4, 1–22 (1968).
4Roberto Piazza, “The strange case of Dr. Petit and Mr. Dulong”,
arXiv:1807.02270 (2018).
5L. Boltzmann, “ €Uber die Natur der Gasmolek €ule,” Wien. Ber. 74,
553–560 (1876).
6A. Einstein, “Die Plancksche Theorie der Strahlung und die Theorie der
speziﬁschen W €arme,” Ann. Phys. 22, 180–190 (1906).
7Jack Willis and Donald F. Kirwan, “The ‘sadly cannot’ thermodynamic
cycle,” Phys. Teach. 18, 51–52 (1980).
8R. H. Dickerson and J. Mottmann, “On the thermodynamic efﬁciencies of
reversible cycles with sloping, straight-line processes,” Am. J. Phys. 62,
558–562 (1994).
9A. Calvo Hern /C19andez, “Heat capacity in a negatively sloping, straight-line
process,” Am. J. Phys. 63, 756–756 (1995).
10M. Bucher, “Graphical determination of heat reversal along a linear PV
process,” Am. J. Phys. 67, 93 (1999).
11S. Velasco, A. Gonz /C19alez, J. A. White, and A. Calvo Hern /C19andez, “Heat
capacity of an ideal gas along an elliptical PV cycle,” Am. J. Phys. 70,
1044–1048 (2002).
12J. J. Arenzon, “Unconventional cycles and multiple adiabatic points,” Eur.
J. Phys. 39, 065103 (2018).
13Jerrold E. Marsden and Anthony Tromba, Vector Calculus (W.H.
Freeman, New York, NY, 2011).
14S. G. Canagaratna, “A critique of the deﬁnitions of heat,” Am. J. Phys. 37,
679–683 (1969).
15Ryogo Kubo, Thermodynamics: An Advanced Course with Problems and
Solutions (North Holland, Amsterdam, 1968).
16The equipartition theorem is valid within classical statistical mechanics
and assumes that the energy of the system contains only quadratic terms.
By employing the equipartition theorem we are assuming temperatures
high enough that quantum effects are negligible and at the same time
sufﬁciently low so that the vibrations may be treated within the har-
monic approximation (only for molecular gases, since monatomic gases
do not have vibrational degrees of freedom). This last approximation iseasily met by real gases at room temperatures; the ﬁrst one must be
more carefully analyzed in each case. For monoatomic gases it holds
very well.
17Harvey S. Leff, “Entropy and heat along reversible paths for ﬂuids andmagnets,” Am. J. Phys. 63, 814–817 (1995).
18M. Levi, The Mathematical Mechanic: Using Physical Reasoning to Solve
Problems (Princeton U. P., Princeton, NJ, 2009).
19Herbert B. Callen, Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics
(John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, 1985), pp. 473–478.
Fig. 5. Density plot and level curves close to a saddle point for an arbitraryh(T,V) (with a saddle point). Numerical values indicate different (and also
arbitrary) values of M. Note that while in the vertical direction Mdecreases
from the saddle point, in the horizontal direction it increases, as expected for
a saddle point. The dashed green line represents the level curve hðT;VÞ¼0,
i.e., the only path in this example, which contains the saddle point for a
given M.
193 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Pacheco, Souza, and Szilard 193 04 October 2023 23:03:44
