
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkBOOK REVIEWS| FEBRUARY 01 2023
On the T rail of Blackbody Radiation: Max Planck and the
Physics of his Era 
On the T rail of Blackbody Radiation: Max Planck and the Physics of his Era . . Don S.  Lemons , William R.  Shanahan , and
Louis J.  Buchholtz . 221 pp.  MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts , 2022. Price: 30$ (hardcover). ISBN 978026047043. (Peter W .
Milonni, Reviewer .)
Am. J. Phys.  91, 159–160 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0137737
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Max Planck and the birth of the quantum hypothesis
Am. J. Phys.  (September 2016)
Blackbody radiation in classical physics: A historical perspective
American Journal of Physics  (July 2018)
The Bose-Einstein condensate temperature of an ideal blackbody
AIP Advances  (September 2018) 04 October 2023 22:49:52
BOOK REVIEWS
The downloaded PDF for any Review in this section contains all the Reviews in this section.
Craig F. Bohren, Editor
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802; mailing address: P.O. Box 887, Boalsburg, PA 16827; bohren@meteo.psu.edu
On the Trail of Blackbody Radiation: Max Planck and the
Physics of his Era. Don S. Lemons, William R. Shanahan,
and Louis J. Buchholtz. pp. MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 2022. Price: 30$ (hardcover). ISBN
978026047043. (Peter W. Milonni, Reviewer.)
Every serious student of physics learns that Planck’s deri-
vation of the blackbody radiation spectrum marked the
beginning of quantum theory. Textbooks typically describeproperties the spectral energy density qð/C23;TÞmust have as a
function of frequency /C23and temperature Tand then proceed
to a derivation of Planck’s spectrum based on quantizedenergies ( E¼h/C23) or on Einstein’s rate equations for emis-
sion and absorption of radiation by atoms in thermal equilib-
rium. The long path Planck took to arrive at his spectrumand introduce his constant h, and the work by him and his
contemporaries that set the stage for his discovery, are for
the most part treated superﬁcially, if at all, in textbooks, andstudents inclined to study the primary literature will likely
encounter unfamiliar scientiﬁc language and notation. The
authors of this book describe it as “a narrative of Planck’sdiscovery” that translates the relevant physics “into a scien-tiﬁc and mathematical language accessible to us and other
students.”
The ﬁrst third of the book reviews basic concepts of ther-
modynamics and derives, succinctly and convincingly, the
Kirchhoff, Stefan–Boltzmann, and Wien laws. A distinguish-
ing feature is the emphasis on thermodynamic adiabaticinvariants—“quantities that are invariant under isentropic
processes.” The Stefan–Boltzmann law is deduced from the
adiabatic invariant of blackbody radiation, and the derivationis compared with Boltzmann’s; an original English translation
of Boltzmann’s paper appears in an appendix. Adiabatic
invariants are also used in a derivation of Wien’s displace-ment law, and an original English translation of Wien’s paper
is provided in another appendix. The rest of the book focuses
on Planck’s “fundamental relation,” how he obtained theblackbody spectrum, and Einstein’s much later derivation. A
ﬁnal section delves further into “The Big Ideas” in the main
text, especially those the authors “found surprising.”
According to Kirchhoff’s law, qð/C23;TÞis independent of
the nature of the blackbody. Planck considered a blackbody
consisting of charged harmonic oscillators (what he called“resonators”), whose energies can change only by absorption
and emission of radiation, and derived the formula
qð/C23;TÞ¼ð 8p/C23
2=c2ÞUð/C23;TÞ, where Uð/C23;TÞis the equilib-
rium energy of a single oscillator. This “fundamental
relation” of classical physics had an essential role in
Planck’s discovery, and a chapter of the book is devoted toits derivation. Using this relation, Planck could obtain
qð/C23;TÞfrom the oscillator entropy Sand the energy Uð/C23;TÞ
it implied. In his October 1900 paper, Planck identiﬁed Sbyessentially interpolating between the entropies known in the
limits of large and small /C23=T. A few months later he derived
Sby applying Boltzmann’s probabilistic deﬁnition of entropy
toNoscillators of total energy P/C15,w h e r e Pis a large integer
and /C15is some ﬁnite “energy element.” This deﬁnition of
entropy depends on the number of ways in which the P
energy elements could be distributed over the Noscillators.
The radical step Planck took to get the entropy needed for his
experimentally veriﬁed spectrum was to treat the Penergy
elements as indistinguishable. From the entropy calculated in
this way he obtained an expression for Uin terms of /C15which,
together with his fundamental relation and the Wien displace-
ment law, implied that /C15must be proportional to /C23:/C15¼h/C23,
where his a universal constant. (Did Planck’s notation for his
constant stem, as has been suggested, from hohlraum, the
German word for “cavity,” or, according to another sugges-tion, from hilfsgr €osse, for “auxiliary variable”?)
The book gives a very readable account of Planck’s work,
from his “sketchy” and sometimes erroneous arguments
leading to his October 1900 paper to the radical counting of
energy elements he used to obtain his spectrum. The impor-tance of the fundamental relation is appropriately empha-
sized. If the equipartition theorem of classical statistical
mechanics, which for Planck’s oscillators implies U¼kT,i s
used in this relation, one obtains the Rayleigh–Jeans spec-
trum. The equipartition theorem is not considered in the
book, although the Rayleigh–Jeans spectrum is brieﬂy men-
tioned (without comment on the ultraviolet catastrophe), andit is remarked that Planck “evidently knew of” Rayleigh’s
derivation. However, the question of whether Planck knew
of Rayleigh’s paper remains open and may never be
answered. Einstein said that, had Planck known of it, “he
would probably not have made his great discovery,” and
Abraham Pais wrote [in Subtle is the Lord: The Science and
the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford University Press, 1982)]that “Planck had made several errors in reasoning before he
arrived at his radiation law, but none as astounding and of as
great historical signiﬁcance as his fortunate failure to be the
ﬁrst to derive [the Rayleigh–Jeans spectrum].” Some discus-
sion in the book of the equipartition theorem and the
Rayleigh–Jeans spectrum would have been appropriate.
The authors raise the question of where quantum physics
enters in Einstein’s 1917 paper. They express surprise that
“this question has no easy answer,” stating that stimulated
emission and absorption are classical processes and that
“spontaneous emission also has a classical analog” in the
radiation by a charged oscillator. They suggest that theanswer to their question “may lie in the non-classical behav-
ior Einstein attributed to spontaneous emission,” in the sense
that the frequency of the radiation is determined by the dif-
ference in the energies of the initial and ﬁnal quantum states
of the emitter. By focusing only on the ﬁrst part of Einstein’s
159 Am. J. Phys. 91(2), February 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 159 04 October 2023 22:49:52
analysis, as do most textbooks, the authors ignore what
Einstein himself considered the most important part, which
dealt with the recoil of molecules as they absorb and emit
radiation. Requiring that the changes in kinetic energiesassociated with this recoil should in thermal equilibrium be
consistent with the Maxwell velocity distribution, Einstein
obtained the Planck spectrum for the radiation. Most impor-tantly, he emphasized that the radiation in absorption and
emission must be “perfectly directional.” In particular, in
spontaneous emission “the molecule suffers a recoil of mag-nitude h/C23=cin a direction which is only determined by
‘chance’.” This recoil in spontaneous emission requires, by
momentum conservation, that the radiation be emitted in theform of what we now call a photon. This is what made
Einstein’s theory a quantum theory of radiation.Despite a few instances in which points of considerable
scientiﬁc and historical interest could have received more
attention without affecting the book’s attractively slim
appearance, the authors have succeeded in presenting a clear,
concise, and reader-friendly “narrative of Planck’s
discovery.”
Peter W. Milonni is a Fellow (ret.) of the Los Alamos
National Laboratory and a Professor of Physics (Research)at the University of Rochester. He is the author of severalbooks including The Quantum Vacuum: An Introduction toQuantum Electrodynamics (Academic Press, 1994), LaserPhysics (with J. H. Eberly, John Wiley & Sons, 2010), and
An Introduction to Quantum Optics and Quantm
Fluctuations (Oxford University Press, 2019).
AJP Index to Advertisers
ALPhA Immersions ................................. Cover 2
AAPT Membership. ................................. Page 81
AAPT ComPADRE ................................. Page 83
AAPT Summer 2023 Meeting ......................... Page 84
AAPT Career Center ...................................T O C
160 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Book Reviews 160 04 October 2023 22:49:52
