
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| AUGUST 01 2022
On the nonlinearity of a tuning fork 
Lintao Xiao ; Chenyu Bao ; Qiuhan Jia ; Haoyang W u; Huijun Zhou ; Jianguo W an; Sihui W ang
Am. J. Phys.  90, 604–609 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.001 1387 04 October 2023 23:14:11
On the nonlinearity of a tuning fork
Lintao Xiao, Chenyu Bao, Qiuhan Jia,Haoyang Wu,Huijun Zhou, Jianguo Wan,a)
and Sihui Wangb)
School of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, People’s Republic of China
(Received 15 June 2020; accepted 4 May 2022)
Tuning fork experiments at the undergraduate level usually only demonstrate a tuning fork’s linear
resonance. In this paper, we introduce an experiment that can be used to measure the nonlinearfrequency response curve of a regular tuning fork. Using double-grating Doppler interferometry,
we achieve measurement precision of the oscillation amplitude in the range of microns. With this
experimental setup, we observe nonlinear behaviors of the tuning fork, such as the softeningfrequency response curve and the jump phenomenon. This provides an integrated experiment for
intermediate-level students and a basis for senior research projects.
#2022 Published under an exclusive
license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0011387
I. INTRODUCTION
Tuning forks are frequently used as stable frequency refer-
ences, but their vibrational modes are surprisingly compli-cated. A model for tuning forks that approximates the tinesas cantilevers (i.e., levers with one end ﬁxed and the other
end free) provides a satisfactory explanation for the vibration
modes and their corresponding frequencies, as long as thevibration amplitudes are sufﬁciently small. These modeshave been previously studied by Rossing et al.
1For in-plane
symmetric modes, the modal frequencies are
fn¼pa
16L2/C18/C19ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
E
3qs
1:1942;2:9882;52;72;…;ð2n/C01Þ2hi
;
(1)
where ais the thickness of the fork’s beam, Lis the length of
the tines, Eis Young’s elastic modulus, and qis the density
of the fork’s material. Note that the frequency of the secondsymmetric mode (the “clang mode”) predicted in Eq. (1)is
over six times (2 :988
2=1:1942times) the principal mode f0,
much higher than small harmonic frequencies such as 2 f0
and 3 f0that are observed in a tuning fork’s spectrum.
These harmonics are due to the non-sinusoidal motion of the
tines, which implies a nonlinear restoring force. To explore
this nonlinearity, we measure frequency response curves. In
the linear region, the maximum response occurs close to thenatural frequency, and the resonance frequency and the Qfac-
tor are independent of amplitude. Nonlinearity occurs at large
amplitudes, where the frequency response curves become
amplitude dependent. The system may harden as the amplitudeincreases, meaning that the resonant peak shifts to a higher fre-quency, or it may soften if the peak shifts to a lower fre-
quency.
2When the driving force exceeds a critical value, the
frequency response curve may become multivalued. The multi-valuedness of the frequency response curve gives rise to a
“jump phenomenon” in which the system transitions between
stable branches on the frequency response curve as the fre-quency changes, leading to an impressive discontinuity andhysteresis in the frequency response curve. In other words, the
oscillation amplitude will depend on whether the driving fre-
quency increases or decreases to a speciﬁc value.
We show how these nonlinear characteristics of tuning forks
can be studied in the undergraduate laboratory. In Sec. II,w ediscuss the nonlinear behaviors of tuning forks, and we apply
an oscillation model containing both quadratic and cubic terms
in the restoring force. In Sec. III, we introduce the double-
grating Doppler interferometry experiment that achieves preci-sion in the range of microns for the oscillation amplitude. In
Sec. IV, we describe the observation of the softening frequency
response curve and the jump phenomenon in the principal
mode of a tuning fork. We believe that this experiment is
an excellent undergraduate demonstration of nonlinear oscilla-tors exhibiting hysteresis frequency responses that can serve as
a basis for senior research projects to further explore the
phenomena.
II. MODELING THE NONLINEARITY
The motion of each tine of the tuning fork resembles that
of a cantilever beam. This type of beam is usually modeled
with the Dufﬁng equation,
2which contains a cubic restoring
force, so that at large amplitudes, the frequency response
curve becomes amplitude dependent. In a cantilever beam
model, the beam’s principal mode shows hardening behavior:
the resonant frequency becomes higher, the resonant peak is
bent to a higher frequency, and the beam’s vibration spectrumhas a prominent third harmonic overtone component.3
However, initial measurements show that this cantilever
beam model does not fully explain the vibration of tuning
forks. We measured the free vibration spectrum of a nominally512 Hz steel tuning fork. For consistency, this was the same
tuning fork used in the measurements described in Sec. IV,s o
there was a small grating attached to one of the tines. The fun-damental frequency of the tuning fork with a weight attached
on it is about 507.5 ð60:5ÞHz. When the weight is removed,
the natural frequency becomes about 519 ð60:5ÞHz.
We recorded the sound with a microphone (model
ECM888B, Superlux Co., Taiwan, China), and we processed
the audio signal with
MATLAB . The semi-log plots of the ampli-
tude as a function of the frequency are shown in Fig. 1.W e
clearly see the response peak at the fundamental frequency
and at a frequency that is about six times the fundamental fre-quency in agreement with the cantilever beam model as
described in Eq. (1). We also see the second harmonic compo-
nent with a normal blow to the tuning fork, and it becomesstronger with a hard blow. However, the third harmonic com-
ponent is imperceptible even with a hard blow. The cantilever
model cannot explain the second harmonic component in the
604 Am. J. Phys. 90(8), August 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 604 04 October 2023 23:14:11
spectrum. It also cannot explain the softening of the principal
mode that will be described in Sec. IV. Therefore, it is neces-
sary to modify the model.
The tines of a real-world tuning fork are geometrically
and physically asymmetric. To describe the asymmetry of
the restoring force, we apply a model for the free vibration
that contains both quadratic and cubic terms
€yþx2
0y¼/C0ay2/C0by3; (2)
where x0is the natural angular frequency with a linear
approximation, yis an effective displacement for the equiva-
lent oscillator of a vibration mode, and aandbare the non-
linear quadratic and cubic stiffness parameters, respectively.
This nonlinear model has been solved in Landau’s textbook.4
In this model, if the fundamental amplitude is b, then the
amplitude for the second harmonic component is ab2=6x2
0;
i.e., the amplitude is proportional to the square of the funda-
mental amplitude b. This dependence was observed previ-
ously by Rossing et al.1
To describe the forced vibrations measured in the fre-
quency response curve, we add a force term with amplitude
Fand driving frequency X
€yþ2kd_yþx2
0y¼/C0ay2/C0by3þFcosXt( 3 )
and also include the damping coefﬁcient kd. In our experi-
ment, yis the displacement of the point on the fork tine
where the grating is attached.
The amplitude frequency response for Eq. (3)is described
by4
b2e/C0jb2 ðÞ2þk2
dhi
¼F2
4x2
0; (4)
where bis the amplitude of the forced vibration, eis the
frequency difference between the driving frequency andthe natural frequency, i.e., e¼X/C0x0, and j¼ð3b=8x0Þ
/C0ð5a2=12x3
0Þ. Equation (4)is a cubic equation for b2.
Its solution features a critical driving amplitude Fk,
where F2
k¼ð32x2
0k3
dÞ=3ﬃﬃﬃ
3p
jjj/C0/C1
. The equation has only one
real root when F<Fk, and there are three real roots when
F>Fkin a certain region of e. Therefore, for driving forces
F>Fk, bistable states appear.4
The resonance frequency shift derived from this model is
eresonance ¼jb2: (5)
A positive jcorresponds to hardening spring behavior
(eresonance ¼Xresonance /C0x0>0, where Xresonance is the fre-
quency of the driving force that results in the largest vibra-
tion amplitude), and a negative jcorresponds to softening
spring behavior ( eresonance <0). For a Dufﬁng oscillator that
only contains a cubic nonlinear term ð/C0by3Þin its restoring
force, the cubic nonlinearity strengthens the restoring force
when b>0 and causes hardening behavior.2Taking a pen-
dulum as an example, when the amplitude of the oscillationincreases, the resonant frequency of the oscillation
decreases, which indicates the softening effect of a pendu-
lum. If the pendulum is modeled as a Dufﬁng oscillator, thenthe coefﬁcient bin the restoring force is negative.
For a general oscillator containing a quadratic nonlinear
termð/C0ay
2Þand a cubic nonlinear term ð/C0by3Þ, like the one
in our model, the quadratic term always contributes to the soft-ening effect regardless of the sign of a, since a negative jcor-
responds to softening spring behavior, and j¼ð3b=8x
0Þ
/C0ð5a2=12x3
0Þ. When the quadratic term dominates, a tuning
fork shows softening behavior, regardless of the cubic nonline-arity. This violation of the cantilever beam model can be veri-ﬁed by measuring its frequency response curves when the
measured frequency response curve resembles the typical soft-
ening frequency response curves ( j<0 ) ,a ss h o w ni nF i g . 2
according to Eq. (4).
Another signiﬁcant consequence of nonlinearity is the
jump phenomenon.
2Under the speciﬁed conditions, the
behavior of the oscillator in the steady state changes dramati-
cally even if the control parameters, such as the driving fre-quency or the driving amplitude, change continuously. In ourexperiment, the oscillation amplitude undergoes this kind of
dramatic change, leading to an impressive discontinuity in
the frequency response curve.
Nevertheless, these jump phenomena do not always occur.
Figure 2(a) shows a typical frequency response curve for a
softening spring when F<F
k, in which case the frequency
response curve is continuous. When the driving amplitude
F>Fk, however, the frequency response curve becomes
multivalued, as shown in Fig. 2(b), giving rise to the jump
phenomenon. For each value of frequency ein the interval
between the frequencies e1ande2, there are three solutions.
Among them, the middle one on CD (dotted line) is unstable,while the other two (BC and DE) are stable.4Hence, a transi-
tion or jump between the stable branches BC and DE on the
frequency response curve may occur as the frequency
changes. To be more speciﬁc, as the driving frequencydecreases quasi-statically (i.e., so slowly that a steady-state
response is achieved) from point A, the amplitude changes
along the curve ABC until the frequency e
1is reached. A
slight frequency decrease at frequency e1causes a spontane-
ous jump from C down to E. As the frequency continues to
decrease beyond e1, the amplitude decreases along the curve
EF. When the driving frequency increases quasi-statically
Fig. 1. The spectrum images of the vibrating tuning fork for a normal blow
and a hard blow. The second harmonic component can be seen with a nor-
mal blow, and this component becomes stronger with a hard blow. The
modal frequency about 6 f0can also be seen.
605 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Xiao et al. 605 04 October 2023 23:14:11
from point F, the amplitude increases along the curve FED
until the frequency e2is reached. A slight frequency increase
at frequency e2causes a spontaneous jump from D up to B.
As the frequency increases further beyond e2, the amplitude
changes along the curve BA. In Sec. IV, we will describe the
veriﬁcation of these resonance properties and the determina-tion of the parameters jandk
dexperimentally.
III. EXPERIMENTAL METHOD
The double-grating Doppler interferometer was developed
by Han et al. in the 1980s,5,6and it was introduced to an
undergraduate laboratory at Nanjing University by Yanget al. in the 1990s.7In our experiment, we use double-
grating Doppler interferometry5,6,8–10to measure the vibra-
tion of a tuning fork. (More experimental details and theory
about a double grating interferometer are given in the supple-mentary material.11) As shown in Fig. 3, two identical dif-
fraction phase gratings are placed parallel to each other. Onegrating is stationary, and the other grating is attached to one
of the fork tines. When a beam of light is incident normal to
the stationary grating plane, the light is diffracted, and thenth order diffracted angle h
nsatisﬁes dsinhn¼nk, where k
is the wavelength of the laser and dis the grating constant.
These diffracted beams are incident on the moving grating
and are diffracted again, and their frequencies shift due to
the laser Doppler effect.12–14The frequency shift is given
by12
D/C23
/C23¼u
cðsinhþsinuÞ; (6)
where /C23is the frequency of light, cis the speed of light, his
the angle of incidence to the moving grating, which is equalto the diffraction angle of the stationary grating, uis the
angular displacement following the moving grating, and uis
the velocity of the moving grating that is parallel to the grat-
ing plane.
In the experiment, the photodetector is placed in align-
ment with the incident light so that only light at the angle
u¼0 is received. Because the two gratings have the
same grating constant, the angle u¼0 only if the order of
the diffraction from the two gratings is equal and oppo-
site; that is, if the diffraction from the ﬁrst grating wasdescribed by dsinh
n¼nkthen the diffraction from the
second grating must be of order – n. We refer to the beam
with diffraction order jnjas beam n. The frequency shift
of beam 1 is D/C231¼/C23usinh1=c¼u=d. Similarly, the fre-
quency shift of an adjacent order (“beam 2”) is 2 u=d.
Since the spacing between the two gratings is small,
the overlapping interference maxima of the adjacent
orders interfere. The interference of beam 1 and beam 2with different frequencies produces an optical beat, the
frequency of which is /C23
b¼uðtÞ=d, where the notation u(t)
is introduced to emphasize that the velocity varies withtime.
Since the beat frequency as a function of time is propor-
tional to the velocity of the vibrating grating, the phase of
the optical beat is given by
wtðÞ¼ð
t
02p/C23bsðÞdsþwo¼2pytðÞ
dþwo: (7)
If we assume that the motion of the grating is harmonic
with the angular frequency Xand the amplitude b, i.e.,
yðtÞ¼bcosðXtÞ, then the light intensity received by the pho-
todetector is
Fig. 2. Typical frequency response curves for a softening spring when (a) F<Fkand (b) F>Fk, where Fkis the critical driving amplitude for a bistable state
to exist.
Fig. 3. Double-grating Doppler interferometry.
606 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Xiao et al. 606 04 October 2023 23:14:11
ItðÞ¼Iocos2pytðÞ
dþwo/C18/C19
¼Iocos2pbcosðxtÞ
dþwo/C18/C19
; (8)
where Iois the intensity of the optical beat and wois the ini-
tial phase.
This expected intensity is plotted in Fig. 4(a). The curve is
periodic: the half-period from A to B, where dw=dt¼0, cor-
responds to the half-period of the vibration from tk/C17kp=x
totkþ1/C17ðkþ1Þp=x. The number of extrema Nwithin
each half-period corresponds to the phase change of pN
/C25wðtkþ1Þ/C0wðtkÞ¼4pb=d. Thus, the vibration amplitude
can be measured by counting the extrema
b/C25Nd
4: (9)
The measurement precision of the oscillation amplitude is
about d=4, reaching the range of microns in our experiment.
Figures 4(b) and4(c) are typical experimental images with
different amplitudes. The relative uncertainty is smaller forlarger amplitudes.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS
As shown in Fig. 5, the double-grating Doppler interfer-
ometer (model DHTM-1 Hangzhou Dahua Co.) consists of a650 nm diode laser, a stationary grating, a moving grating, a
512 Hz steel tuning fork, driving coil, and a photodetector.
The experimental setup (takes up 140 /C2160 mm
2)i s
mounted on a 200 /C2400 mm2optical table. The stationary
grating is placed in a mount that allows translation alongtwo axes, and the moving grating is attached to one of thetines of the fork. The grating constant for both gratings
isd¼1:0/C210
/C05m, and the size of the grating is
10.0/C210.0 mm2. The driving coil is placed above the upper
tine of the fork. When a sinusoidal current is input into thedriving coil, it produces an AC magnetic ﬁeld and drives thefork tine to vibrate; thus, the grating attached to the fork tinevibrates synchronously. The sinusoidal current is biased toavoid frequency doubling of the driving force. For simplic-ity, we approximate the driving force as FcosXt. In this
experiment, the sinusoidal current is generated by the Direct
digital synthesis (DDS) signal generator with a power ampli-
ﬁer (model DH0803, Hangzhou Dahua Co.).
The two gratings are ﬁrst aligned carefully in order to
make them parallel to each other; this process is described inthe supplementary material.
11When the gratings are per-
fectly parallel to each other, the size of the overlappingregion of the interference maxima depends on the waistradius of the Gaussian beam and the distance between these
two gratings. In our experiment, the light beam is about
1 mm in diameter, and the distance between the two gratingsis 6.5 mm to make the light spots overlap and optical beatsoccur.
The additional mass of the moving grating causes the nat-
ural frequency of the tuning fork to decrease. The natural fre-quency of the tuning fork with the grating is 507.5 60.5 Hz,
and the natural frequency of the tuning fork without the grat-ing is 519.0 60.5 Hz. (Both the natural frequencies are mea-
sured from the sound spectrum.)
The signal generator is tuned near 508 Hz, making the
fork tine resonate. The light that exits from the laser goesthrough the stationary grating and the moving grating insequence and then enters the photodetector. After amplify-ing, the photoelectric signal is input into the oscilloscope. Ifthe experimental parameters are tuned appropriately, one canobserve the optical beat signal on the oscilloscope (model
UTD7102B, UNI-T) [as shown in Figs. 4(b) and4(c)].
Figure 6shows the amplitude frequency response curves
of the tuning fork. To obtain this curve, the driving fre-quency is increased very slowly from 507 to 509 Hz and thendecreased from 509 to 507 Hz. It is worth noting that waitinguntil the vibrating amplitude is stable is the key for accuratemeasurement. In our experiment, the amplitudes at certainfrequencies take a long time to stabilize. (Sometimes, it caneven take half an hour to stabilize.)
In our experiment, the frequency was varied by steps of
0.03 Hz so that amplitude did not vary dramatically betweentwo adjacent experimental points (outside the jump zone),and the vibration did not take too long to stabilize. There
Fig. 4. Intensities in double-grating Doppler interferometry. (a) Theoretical plot for 2 pb=d¼3:3p;wo¼0:2. (b) and (c) Experimental observations with small
(b) and large (c) amplitudes.
Fig. 5. Experimental setup of the double-grating Doppler interferometer.
607 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Xiao et al. 607 04 October 2023 23:14:11
were ﬁve experimental points inside and near the jump zone
for which we waited longer for the vibration to stabilize.Using this procedure, the total time required for this mea-surement was approximately 6 h.
In Fig. 6, the data plotted in orange asterisks and dark blue
crosses are the results at a driving current with an amplitudeof 30 mA with increasing and decreasing frequencies,respectively, and the data plotted in red squares and blue tri-angles are the results at a driving current of 90 mA withincreasing and decreasing driving frequencies, respectively.The solid curves are the theoretical results obtained by ﬁttingthe data with Eq. (4). The parameters we use for ﬁtting
arex
0¼2p/C2507:90 Hz, j¼/C048:19 mm/C02s/C01, and
kd¼0:16 s/C01for the 30 mA current and x0¼2p/C2507:86
Hz,j¼/C09:30 mm/C02s/C01, and kd¼0:20 s/C01for the 90 mA
current. The variation of coefﬁcients might be caused by thenonlinearity of the driving force and the damping, which areboth simpliﬁed as linear. According to Eq. (9), the amplitude
uncertainty is 2 :5/C210
/C03mm.
The frequency response curves show obvious softening
spring behaviors, and the jump phenomenon occurs between507.5 and 507.6 Hz for the 90 mA driving current. The datapoints in the inset correspond to the bi-stable region nearBCED, which is similar to that illustrated in Fig. 2(b). The
curve is a guide for the eyes. When the driving frequencyincreases from point F, the amplitude increases along thecurve and experiences a jump from D up to B. When the fre-quency decreases from point A, the amplitude changes alongthe curve and experiences a downward jump from C to E.The frequency response curve forms a hysteresis loop BCEDas illustrated in the inset of Fig. 6. Although the hysteresis
loop in the ﬁgure is small and easily overlooked, it has beenfound repeatedly in our experiments.
V. DISCUSSION
It is difﬁcult to determine the coefﬁcients a,b,o rjandk
d
from the physical parameters in our mathematical model.
Finite element calculations are required, as well as a detailedunderstanding of material properties and geometric parame-ters. Nevertheless, we can still investigate resonance proper-ties and determine these parameters experimentally. The factthat the second harmonic component is much stronger thanthe other harmonic components indicates that the quadraticterm prevails in our tuning fork. Quantitative results may be
obtained through a more detailed measurement. For exam-ple, it may be possible to calculate the coefﬁcients bydirectly measuring the amplitudes of the second and thirdharmonics such as with an accelerometer. However, in aforced vibration system such as this, nonlinearity has variousorigins such as geometrical, mechanical, or electromagneticnonlinearity. The parameters are sensitive to minor altera-tions in the symmetry either physically or geometrically. Forexample, bending the tines inward inhibits the second har-monic.
1Driving or detecting components, such as coils or
electrodes, coupled to the tines might also introduce addi-tional nonlinearity to the restoring force, the driving force,and the damping. In these cases, the signs and magnitudes ofthe coefﬁcients might be altered, and the behavior of theoscillator might change as well. In our experiment, the non-linearity parameters and the damping coefﬁcient change asthe driving force increases. By adjusting the driving ordetecting parameters such as the amplitude or the bias of thedriving current appropriately, the nonlinear coefﬁcients canbe controlled according to practical needs.
In addition to varying the frequency slowly, the jump phe-
nomenon should also be observed and measured by changingthe amplitude of the excitation.
15The discontinuity of the
amplitude curve also manifests as the change in loudness,
which can be heard with human ears in our experiment.
VI. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we have investigated the nonlinear behaviors
of a regular tuning fork. In theory, we apply an oscillationmodel containing both quadratic and cubic terms in the restor-ing force. The strong second harmonic component and thesoftening spring behaviors observed in the experiment can beattributed to quadratic nonlinearity. In the experiment, we applythe double-grating Doppler interferometry and achieve the mea-surement precision of the oscillation amplitude in the range ofmicrons. We observed the softening frequency response curveand the jump phenomenon. In practical applications, the nonlin-ear frequency shift and the jump phenomenon should beaddressed, especially for micro-resonators, such as quartz tun-ing forks (QTFs), in various sensors and microscopies. Thisprovides an integrated experiment for intermediate-level stu-dents and a basis for senior research projects.
Fig. 6. Amplitude frequency response curves. The data plotted in the red squares and the orange asterisks are the results with driving currents of 30 an d9 0m A
for increasing driving frequency, respectively. The data plotted in dark blue plus signs and blue triangles are the results with driving currents of 3 0 and 90 mA
for the decreasing driving frequency, respectively. The solid curves are theoretical results.
608 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Xiao et al. 608 04 October 2023 23:14:11
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Jiahao Dong and Yao Luo
for their help in the experiment and the data collection for thispaper during the COVID-19 pandemic. The authors aregrateful to Ningyue Wang for editing and proofreading thismanuscript. In addition, the authors extend their sincerethanks to the reviewers for their kind suggestions.
a)wanjg@nju.edu.cn
b)wangsihui@nju.edu.cn
1T. D. Rossing, D. A. Russell, and D. E. Brown, “On the acoustics of tuning
forks,” Am. J. Phys. 60(7), 620–626 (1992).
2I. Kovacic and M. J. Brennan, The Dufﬁng Equation: Nonlinear
Oscillators and Their Behaviour (John Wiley & Sons, United Kingdom
2011), pp. 37–50, 139–156.
3H. Wagner, “Large-amplitude free vibrations of a beam,” J. Appl. Mech.
32(4), 887–892 (1965).
4L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Mechanics: Volume 1 , 3rd ed.
(Butterworth-Heinemann, United Kingdom 1976), pp. 84–92.
5Q. Han, Z. Huang, Z. Wu, M. Yi, and X. Yang, “Theory and experimentof frequency-shift effect of phase gratings,” Chin. J. Lasers 9(5), 66 (1982)
(in Chinese).6Q. Han, Y. Zhang, M. Yi, Z. Huang, and X. Yang, “Double gratingfrequency shift effect of the laser beam and its application,” Chin. J.
Lasers 12(6), 343–345 (1985) (in Chinese).
7X. Yang, B. Hua et al. ,Experiments in College Physics: III–IV (Department of
Physics, Nanjing University, China 1999), pp. 40–43 (unpublished, in Chinese).
8Z. Du, S. Li, C. Jiang, Z. Tao, H. Gao, and Y. Xie, “Small vibration mea-surement using laser grating Doppler effect,” Acta Opt. Sin. 24(6),
834–837 (2004) (in Chinese).
9P. Zhang, H. Zhou, and S. Wang, “Amplitude modulation of resultant lightsignal in measuring of tiny displacement with double gratings,” Res.
Explor. Lab. 282, 15–19 (2009) (in Chinese).
10S. Chen, P. Zeng, H. Zhou, and S. Wang, “Improvement and application
on method of measuring the tiny displacement with double-grating,” Coll.
Phys. 35(1), 53–56 (2016) (in Chinese).
11See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/10.1119/
10.0011387 for 1. Experimental details; 2. Theory about the double-grating
Doppler interferometer.
12J. Bahrmann, K.-R. Detring, and G. Simonsohn, “Frequency shifting of laser
radiation by a moving grating,” Opt. Commun. 22(3), 365–368 (1977).
13K. B. Dossou, “Doppler shift generated by a moving diffraction grating under
incidence by polychromatic diffuse light,” Appl. Opt. 55(15), 3915–3924 (2016).
14Q. Sha, S. Qiu, T. Liu, W. Wang, and Y. Ren, “Doppler effect of polariza-
tion grating,” Appl. Opt. 60(10), 2788–2794 (2021).
15A. H. Nayfeh and D. T. Mook, Nonlinear Oscillations (John Wiley &
Sons, United Kingdom 1995), p. 170.
609 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Xiao et al. 609 04 October 2023 23:14:11
