
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| AUGUST 01 2022
Painting in polarization 
Aaron D. Slepkov
Am. J. Phys.  90, 617–624 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0087800
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Advances in large scale laser paint stripping
ICALEO
Polygon scanner for laser paint stripping
PICALO
Virtual painting
AIP Conf. Proc.  (August 2023) 04 October 2023 23:14:22
Painting in polarization
Aaron D. Slepkova)
Physics & Astronomy, Trent University, Peterborough, Ontario K9L 0G2, Canada
(Received 9 February 2022; accepted 15 June 2022)
The array of colors and patterns seen when birefringent materials are inserted between polarizers is
a source of amusement, popular science demonstrations, and art. This phenomenon of polarization-ﬁltered coloration is commonly but misleadingly referred to as “interference colors,” despite not
arising from the effects of interference. In this work, I clarify the link between polarization ﬁltering
and the observed colors and demonstrate how various aspects of birefringence in common
household ﬁlms provide opportunities and challenges for their use in art.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0087800
I. INTRODUCTION
The array of patterned colors that can arise when birefrin-
gent materials are sandwiched between linear polarizers has
been appreciated both for beauty and usefulness for as long
as polarized light has been produced.1–3In fact, it has
become commonplace for optics textbooks to include photo-graphs of colorful arrangements of cellophane tape, stressedglass, or plastic utensils as an introductory visual illustration
of birefringence.
4Beyond aesthetic attributes, the phenome-
non has found long-standing use in various technical ﬁelds.For example, minute anisotropies in annealed glass can giverise to local “stress-induced” birefringence that can be visu-alized in polarized light,
5and glassblowers commonly use
the technique to reveal unseen internal stress near cooled
joints. Since the early 1830s, geologists and mineralogists
have developed a framework for using the patterns and col-ors that arise in a polarization microscope to identify mineralsamples.
6The Michel-L /C19evy interference color chart is
widely used by geologists to match observed color to sample
thickness, orientation, and birefringence.7
Inspired both by challenge and opportunity, artists have
sought to move beyond random patterning and colorationdisplayed by everyday birefringent objects to create deliber-ately constructed vividly colored images using this phenom-enon. Undoubtedly, the artist best known for this is Austine
Wood Comarow (1942–2020).
8Austine pioneered the art of
the polarization collage, or “polage,” as it has come to beknown.9Using sophisticated layering of cut cellophane and
other birefringent polymer ﬁlms, interspersed with layers ofﬁlm polarizers, Austine created a wide array of works, rang-ing from small standalone pieces that ﬁt on a shelf, to mas-
sive career-spanning installations in institutions such as the
Disney Epcot Center in Florida (in 1981) and theGyeongsangnam-do Institute of Science Education in Korea(in 2017).
10Austine’s early attempts at deterministic local-
ized control of birefringence-borne colors presaged full-
color liquid crystal display (LCD) technology. Indeed, the
careful control of electrically induced birefringence inmicroscopic elements of liquid crystals sandwiched betweencrossed-polarizers is the principal operating mechanism forthe LCD displays in computer monitors, laptops, tablets, and
cellphones.
11
This paper aims to clarify the underlying physical process
that gives rise to colors seen in birefringent samples whenobserved through polarizers, especially in the context of artand educational demonstrations. Through examples thatincorporate common everyday polarization and birefringent
materials, I provide insight into the basic physical attributes of
these colored structures, including the dramatic effects ofthickness variation on perceived colors and the non-intuitive
effects of layer addition. This updated and physically minded
review of the phenomenon should prove useful to science edu-cators, students, and artists alike, providing a foundation for
understanding the observed colors from a spectral standpoint.
II. BIREFRINGENCE, RETARDANCE, AND THE
POLARIZATION GATE
Birefringence is an optical property wherein the index of
refraction depends on the polarization directions of light.Whereas isotropic materials present a uniform index of
refraction to incident light of all polarizations, crystalline or
otherwise structured materials may present two or three dis-tinct indexes of refraction along speciﬁc optic axes. Quasi-
two-dimensional birefringent materials, such as the polymer
ﬁlms described in this work, display uniaxial birefringence,meaning that there are two distinct orthogonal directions
(optic axes) corresponding to the maximum and minimum
index of refraction. At its most basic, the index of refractionaffects the propagation speed of light. The index of refrac-
tion is determined by the projection of the electric ﬁeld onto
the optic axes. When the light is polarized along one of theoptic axes in the material, all the light propagates with a sin-gle index, and its polarization state is, thus, unaffected by the
existence of other directions with different indexes of refrac-
tion; the light does not experience any birefringence. On theother hand, light that is polarized at an angle to an optic axis
can be broken down (mathematically or conceptually) into
orthogonal components projected onto the optic axes, witheach component traveling at a different speed in the material.
Quantitatively, we can deﬁne the birefringence of the sample
as the difference between the maximum and minimum indexof refraction, Dn.
As different components of the electric ﬁeld experience
different indexes of refraction, they travel at slightly differ-
ent speeds. Any such mismatch in speeds can be described interms of a temporal delay, or in terms of an evolving retard-
ance between phase components of the light. Phase retard-
ance, d, expresses the difference in phase (in units of
radians) between the electric ﬁeld component that is along
the optic axis and the component that is perpendicular to it.
For a birefringent material of thickness d, under normal
617 Am. J. Phys. 90(8), August 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 617 04 October 2023 23:14:22
incidence, the retardance depends on the wavelength of the
light ( k) and on the magnitude of birefringence such that
d¼2pdDn
k: (1)
It is the combination of this phase retardance and the angle
between the incoming polarization and the optic axis, h, that
determines the polarization state of the light as it emerges
from the birefringent material. Incident linearly polarized
light may emerge from the birefringent material either unaf-
fected, linearly polarized along a new direction, elliptically
polarized with rotated (or the same) major axis, or circularlypolarized. Furthermore, the dependence of retardance on the
wavelength of light means that, for a given sample orienta-
tion, birefringence, and thickness, the polarization state of
the light emerging from the birefringent layer is continuously
changing across the spectrum. However, since neither oureyes nor most cameras are sensitive to polarization state, we
are not able to discern any visual difference in color between
the incident light and the light emerging from a given bire-fringent sample submitted to white-light illumination.
Observation of birefringence-dependent colors requires a
transparent sample with regions of retardance to be placed
between an initial polarizer (which polarizes the input light)
and a second polarizer (which is called the analyzer).
Together, the polarizer and analyzer comprise what is knownas a polarization gate. If the analyzer’s polarization axis
is aligned with that of the entrance polarizer, the condition is
referred to as an open gate, and if the analyzer isperpendicular to the entrance polarizer, the condition is
referred to as a closed gate. The analyzer transmits an inten-
sity that depends on the polarization state of the light emerg-
ing from the sample and its orientation relative to theanalyzer’s polarization axis. A polarizer fully transmits
polarization components aligned with it, fully extinguishes
components that are perpendicular to its axis, and attenuatesall intermediate polarizations. Thus, the different polariza-tions that correspond to each wavelength are transmitted in
different proportions, thereby resulting in a variable spectral
intensity that we observe as distinct colors. This process isschematically illustrated in Fig. 1.
In general, the transmitted spectrum, IkðÞ, as a function
of the incident spectrum, I
0kðÞ, and the angle between the
input polarizer axis and the sample’s optic axis, h, are given
by12
ICGkðÞ¼I0kðÞsin2p
kdDn/C18/C19
sin22hðÞ; (2)
and the transmission coefﬁcient can be expressed as
TCGkðÞ/C17ICGkðÞ
I0kðÞ¼sin2d
2/C18/C19
sin22hðÞ: (3)
For the open-gate conﬁguration
IOGkðÞ¼I0kðÞ1/C0sin2p
kdDn/C18/C19
sin22hðÞ/C20/C21
(4)
Fig. 1. (Color online) A schematic representation of the principle of polarization-ﬁltered coloration. A vertical polarizer ﬁlters incident unpol arized white light,
passing vertically-polarized light to a birefringent sample of thickness dand birefringence Dn, with its optic axis rotated by hfrom the vertical. Different wave-
lengths within the white light experience distinct values of retardance such that their polarization states are different from each other after the s ample. In the
case shown here ( h¼45/C14andd¼pfor red light), the sample is a half-wave plate for red light, which means that linear polarization is maintained for red light,
while the other colors emerge elliptically polarized, with the major axis of polarization of all wavelengths rotated by 2 h¼90/C14. Despite the differing polariza-
tion across the spectrum, without further polarization ﬁltering, the post-sample light would still appear white. Once the light passes through an an alyzer, each
wavelength is ﬁltered in proportion to its polarization’s projection onto the analyzer’s polarization axis. For the case of an open (closed) gate, as shown on the
top (bottom) path, the analyzer is a vertical (horizontal) polarizer. The open gate extinguishes the horizontally polarized red light, while the clo sed gate fully
transmits red light. The observed color is complementary between the two gate conditions. In the example shown here, the observed color emerging from the
open gate is a red-poor ocean-green, and that emerging from the closed gate is a red-laden orange-red.
618 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Aaron D. Slepkov 618 04 October 2023 23:14:22
and
TOGkðÞ¼1/C0TCGkðÞ: (5)
As expected, in the closed-gate condition, all light is extin-
guished when the birefringent sample is oriented along oneof the polarization axes (i.e., h¼0
/C14), irrespective of the
magnitude of the retardance. When the birefringent sample
is oriented at h¼45/C14with respect to the polarization axis of
the input polarizer, maximum spectral modiﬁcation is
observed in both the open- and closed-gate arrangements,
with
ICGkðÞ¼I0kðÞsin2p
kdDn/C18/C19
(6)
and
IOGkðÞ¼I0kðÞ/C0ICGkðÞ: (7)
III. MATERIALS AND METHODS
All that is needed to create polarization-ﬁltered color is a
birefringent sample sandwiched in a polarization gate. Most
computer, tablet, and cellphone screens emit linearly polar-
ized light and are, thus, convenient replacements of tradi-tional polarization light boxes. Displaying a full-screen
blank white image sufﬁces for creating a diffuse polarized
light source, thus obviating the need for an initial polarizer.The analyzer can simply be polarized sunglasses. Designed
to eliminate horizontally polarized glare off of (angled) hori-
zontal surfaces, polarized sunglasses are linear polarizersthat transmit vertically polarized light when worn. However,
rotation of the sunglasses in the plane of the screen yields an
analyzer with any desired orientation.
Samples capable of providing a kaleidoscopic array of col-
ors and patterns
13can be easily found in any household:
transparent plastic cutlery provides a classic demonstra-tion,14,15where localized strain in the polymer structure
results in differential birefringence, observable through a
polarization gate. Likewise, quasi-randomly folded kitchen“cling wrap” ﬁlm, gift basket ﬁlm, and layered adhesive tape
can form intricate images reminiscent of stained-glass win-
dows. Figure 2shows an example of the array of colors and
patterns that can be created by layering clear packaging tape
on a glass plate, as illuminated by a computer screen and
photographed through polarized sunglasses.
The use of polarization sheets, or polaroids, allows for the
construction of more controlled and convenient polarized
light sources and analyzers than do computer screens and
sunglasses. Because they can be cut to any size and easily
afﬁxed to a frame, sheet polarizers are convenient for creat-
ing artistic pieces for display. A set of polarizer sheets alsomake an excellent classroom demonstration kit, whether for
use with electronic screen illumination or as initial polarizers
for use with sunlight.
16
Creating a diffuse (i.e., featureless) light source is impor-
tant for optimal viewing. This is easily accomplished using a
piece of kitchen parchment paper or wax paper as the ﬁrst
layer before the initial polarizer. These papers are more trans-lucent than standard white printer paper, yet the latter can be
used if desired. It is important that the diffusing layer be
placed outside of the polarization gate (i.e., before the ﬁrstpolarizer), as it can signiﬁcantly depolarize the light. Figure 3
shows a work of art mounted in a simple picture frame, forwindow display using sunlight as an illumination source.Parchment paper is used as the backing diffusing layer. The
birefringent materials comprise three different household
adhesive tape products layered on picture-frame glass.
The material of choice for professional polage has tradi-
tionally been cellophane.
9,17In the past, most gift-wrap and
household adhesive tape products were made from cello-phane. Cellophane has a birefringence of approximately
Dn¼0.011,12,18which means that typical 15–30 lm-thick
sheets can provide sufﬁcient retardance to form a palette ofcolors very similar to those shown in Fig. 4for packaging
tape. Commercially, true cellophane has been supplanted bybiaxially oriented polypropylene ﬁlm or BOPP.
19Most BOPP
packaging tape and transparent ﬁlm sold as “celo”-wrap (or
Sellotape) show a birefringence of Dn¼0.010–0.01512,20and,
thus, are at least as good as cellophane for polage, as demon-strated by the images in this article. Other birefringent materi-als from which polage can be made are polyethylene (clingwrap) and polyoleﬁn (some high-gloss gift-wrap tapes); both
of which display much smaller birefringence of
Dn¼0.0025–0.0045.
12Ultimately, the combination of mate-
rials with varying birefringence and/or thicknesses can pro-vide a broader range of colors and color control. For example,the piece shown in Fig. 3combines three different packaging
tape products, each of which provides slightly different maxi-
mum retardance.
An artist’s palette is an important starting point for any
painting, whereas an expert painter develops the ability to
Fig. 2. (Color online) Untitled, by the author. A stained-glass-like image
formed by layering adhesive tape in various orientations and thicknesses on
a2 0/C225 cm2glass plate. This image is illuminated by the diffuse polarized
light of a laptop computer screen and is photographed through polarized sun-glasses. In the top panel, the image is photographed through sunglasses
transmitting vertical polarization, while in the bottom panel, the sunglasses
are rotated by 90
/C14to transmit horizontal polarization.
619 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Aaron D. Slepkov 619 04 October 2023 23:14:22
mix a wider array of colors from those obtained “out of the
tube,” establishing one’s palette is often an important ﬁrststep. For polage, the equivalent of out of the tube colors
comes from layering a given material at the maximum bire-
fringence condition (i.e., at 45
/C14to the gate polarization
axis).17An example of such a palette for layers of packaging
tape, both for open- and closed-gate conditions, is shown inFig. 4. It is important to establish the orthogonal birefrin-
gence directions (i.e., the optic axes) for the sample, so thatthe maximum birefringence condition can be found. This ismost easily done by crossing the polarizers without a sample,and then inserting and rotating a single layer of the birefrin-gent ﬁlm until maximum brightness is observed at h¼45
/C14.For the packaging tape, the optic axes of the tape are essen-
tially along and across the roll. This is not universally true
for all samples.12For example, typical 19-mm gift-wrap
Scotch tape gives maximum optical action when rotated by
only h¼10/C14(not 45/C14), thus reﬂecting the fact that the optic
axis is not aligned with the roll of tape in that material.
Unlike a traditional artist’s palettes because the closed-
gate transmission is complementary to the open-gate trans-
mission (as reﬂected by Eq. (5)), the two palettes shown in
Fig.4cannot, in general, be intermixed in the same image.
However, different ﬁlms can provide unique palettes of their
own, and thus, different ﬁlms (and ﬁlm orientations) can be
used to ﬁll gaps in available colors.
IV. PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES OF
POLARIZATION-FILTERED COLORATION
A. Layering, transmission spectra, and perceived colors
Transmission spectra provide instructive links between
sample birefringence, layering, and perceived colors. Spectrafrom selected regions of interest in Fig. 4are presented in
Fig.5. Consistent with Eqs. (6)and(7), the transmission is
observed to be deeply modulated as a function of wave-length. For example, in the case of two layers of packagingtape viewed through a closed-gate, the 720-nm light is nearly
extinguished, while the 480-nm light is fully transmitted.
The overall transmitted spectrum in this case is a broad peakin the visible range, with a maximum at 515 nm, which cor-
responds to the color cyan, as can be seen in the center panel
of Fig. 4(and the inset in the top panel of Fig. 5). Other per-
ceived colors are not well described by a speciﬁc central
wavelength. For example, when the two layers are viewed in
the open gate arrangement, the complementary spectrum isobserved, with a maximum transmission at 720 nm and a
nearly complete removal of the 480-nm light. This results in
a color composed of strong reds and the absence of blues,which is perceived as a ruddy brown. In color theory, com-
plementary colors are those that combine to give white light.
Thus, as described conceptually by Eq. (5)and visually in
Fig. 3. (Color online) Eclipse No. 1 by the author, mounted for sunlight illumination, and displayed afﬁxed to a window. This piece was created by cutti ng and
layering three types of adhesive tapes on the glass plate from a simple picture frame purchased at a “dollar” store. All layers ﬁt within the plastic fra me and
include, from back to front: kitchen parchment paper as a diffuser, sheet polarizer with vertical polarization, glass, adhesive tape, and sheet pola rizer with hori-
zontal polarization (closed-gate conﬁguration). The thin grey border is created with multi-layered tape arranged to allow color-independent tran smission (as
described in Fig. 5), thus revealing the backing diffuser layer.
Fig. 4. (Color online) A simple palette of colors for layers of Scotch 371
packaging tape oriented at 45/C14to the input polarizer (i.e., at maximum bire-
fringence) and illuminated by an incandescent halogen bulb. 1–12 overlap-
ping layers are observed without the ﬁnal polarizer (left), through crossed
polarizers (middle), and through aligned polarizers (right).
620 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Aaron D. Slepkov 620 04 October 2023 23:14:22
Fig.4, the open and closed gate arrangements yield natural
complementary color pairs.
The layering palettes in Fig. 4show that the resulting col-
ors become increasingly washed out as the number ofstacked layers increases, eventually becoming gray. Thereare two main reasons for this, as can be inferred from the dif-
ferent spectra in Fig. 5, where the bottom panel shows the
spectra from 12 layers of packaging tape. First, the spectralmodulation rapidly narrows (in wavelength) with increasingsample thickness. As suggested by Eqs. (2)and(4), the trans-
mission peaks get closer together in wavelength, and the
spectrum is eventually modulated so rapidly that the per-
ceived color is effectively an average through those modula-tions. This is perceived visually as a lower-intensity versionof the incident spectrum. Second, after numerous layers,
the polarization purity is signiﬁcantly reduced, thus dimin-ishing the effects of birefringence and of the analyzer. Thiscan be seen as a reduction in the modulation depth of thetransmitted spectrum, as shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 5
for a 12-layer sample. In this case, the transmitted spectrumno longer shows spectral regions of high transmission andfull extinction.
B. Polarization-filtered colors are not an interference
phenomenon
When a birefringent material displays continuous local
variation in thickness and/or birefringence, the resulting pat-tern of colors is highly reminiscent of those which appear insoap bubbles, oil slicks, and other thin ﬁlms in which inter-ference effects dominate.
21This is perhaps the reason why
the phenomenon underlying polage is referred to as“interference colors.”9,22–24However, as described above
(and in Fig. 1), the observed colors arise from the selective
ﬁltering of spectrally variable polarization components.
While the mechanism underlying the operation of some
polarizers could be described in terms of interference,25the
description of polage as interference phenomena is mislead-ing. This is a possible reason why the phenomenon is notwidely detailed in physics textbooks. In particular, aninterference-based description implies both constructive anddestructive interferences. For example, constructive interfer-ence between two beams can result in intensities that arelarger than the simple sum of the (un-interfered) beam inten-sities. Thus, one might expect that at speciﬁc thicknesses ofbirefringent material, the resulting intensity at a key wave-length could exceed that of the incident illumination.However, this is not the case, and any such indications arelikely measurement artefacts.
9In order to avoid future mis-
conceptions and to aid in an intuitive understanding of thephenomenon, I prefer to call this phenomenon polarization-ﬁltered coloration (PFC). While the original terminologyprior to interference colors was chromatic polarization,
1,22I
also ﬁnd the latter potentially confusing because of the sug-gestion that the colors are distinguishable by their polariza-tion state. Rather, the important role of the analyzer as apolarization ﬁlter, as shown in Fig. 1, should be made para-
mount. Hence, PFC.
C. Optical thickness and observation angle
The retardance produced by the birefringent sample
depends on the distance traveled by the light in the sample.For example, when light travels at an angle through the sam-ple, then in Eq. (1), the thickness dis replaced by the diago-
nal distance through the tape. Varying the observation angle,
then, alters the phase retardance and, therefore, changes theobserved polarization-ﬁltered colors. This effect is wellknown to polage artists, who often mention the shimmeringor “dynamic” aspects of their work.
8For large installations,
the fact that viewers will see different arrays of color is takeninto consideration when designing works of art.26Indeed,
two observers standing next to each other may see drasticallydifferent coloration from a closely viewed work. As anexample, Fig. 6shows a sequence of photographs taken at
different angles from a single work. As can be seen in theﬁgure, any region of interest can transform in color as one’svantage point changes. The same region can appear green,
Fig. 5. (Color online) Measured transmitted spectra through layers of pack-
aging tape in open- and closed-gate conﬁgurations, illuminated by an incan-
descent halogen bulb. The perceived color resulting from the transmitted
spectra is reproduced as an inset in each panel and corresponds to the colorsshown in Fig. 4. (Top panel) The gate-ﬁltered spectra from two layers of
tape show a ﬁrst-order full-waveplate action at /C24720 nm, observed as a min-
imum (maximum) transmission through a closed (open) gate. Note that the
perceived closed-gate color of cyan is consistent with a broad quasi-
symmetric transmission maximum near 520 nm. (Middle panel) The gate-
ﬁltered spectra from four layers of tape. (Bottom panel) The gate-ﬁltered
spectra from 12 layers of tape, in which the rapid modulation in the transmit-ted spectra across the visible regime is perceived as a dull grey in both open-
and closed-gate conﬁgurations. Scattering from numerous interfaces and
adhesive layers degrades the polarization purity of the transmitted light,
leading to increasingly reduced transmission and extinction. The colors of
the visible spectrum are reproduced at the top of the image, aligned to scale
with the wavelength axis of the three plots, as a reference.
621 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Aaron D. Slepkov 621 04 October 2023 23:14:22
cyan, blue, pink, or purple, with only minor changes in view-
ing angle.
D. Addition and subtraction of birefringence
In describing PFC, I began with the preparation of linearly
polarized light but did not elucidate the range of polarizationstates that can emerge from the birefringent sample. The
most general state of polarization—elliptical—is both con-
ceptually and mathematically cumbersome to describe. Thetransmission of light through the analyzer depends both on
the light’s ellipticity and on the angle between the analyzer’s
polarization axis and the major axis of the ellipse (as hinted
at in Fig. 1). Subtle changes in either parameter can lead to
different transmitted spectral intensities and, thus, to differ-ent perceived colors. In general, birefringent optical ele-
ments do not commute.
27This means that when light passes
through a set of birefringent regions, the ordering of thoseregions can matter: The emerging state of polarization is dif-
ferent for different layering sequences. In many cases,
including when observation is strictly through entirely open
or closed gates, the observed colors are not perceptibly dif-
ferent as a function of layer ordering. However, when theanalyzer is oriented in-between the open- and closed-gate
conditions, the effect of layer ordering on observed color can
be signiﬁcant. An example of this is presented in Fig. 7,
which shows a two-layer sequence of packaging and gift-
wrap adhesive tapes. An ordering in which the packagingtape is the bottom layer appears dark blue, while it appears
orange when the packaging tape is the top layer. Aside from
the layering sequence, there is no difference between the tworegions; both comprise the same materials at the same orien-
tation. The states of polarization emerging from the two
regions in the sample are both elliptical, but likely with dif-ferent major axes. When the analyzer is set at any transmis-sion angle that is not exactly between the two major axes,
the polarization ﬁltering results in differing spectra and, thus,
in different perceived colors. This is one of the principal dif-ferences between painting with colored media and paintingwith polarization: Whereas expertise and intuition allows
Fig. 6. (Color online) Observation angle and the effects of ﬁlm thickness on transmitted color inthe author’s work titled “Several more circles after
Kandisky.” Transparent adhesive tape on the glass plate (20 /C225 cm2), illuminated by a white-background laptop screen with crossed-polarizer and viewed
from different positions about the screen: (1) viewed from above and right of the screen; (2) above the screen; (3) from above and left of the screen; (4) from
the right; (5) in line with the screen; and (6) from the left. Bottom panels (10–60) show a zoom-in region from the corresponding upper panels. Panel 5 was
featured in Optics & Photonics News , July/August 2020.
Fig. 7. (Color online) A photo of two strips of gift-wrap tape layered on/
under a larger strip of packaging tape as an example of the non-commutative
properties of birefringence. The layer of gift wrap tape is under the packag-
ing tape in the top strip (appearing dark blue), while it is on top of the pack-aging tape in the bottom strip (appearing orange). While the two strips, thus,
represent the same two layers, the sequence of birefringence changes the
resultant polarization state before the analyzer and, thus, can yield different
observed colors. This effect is most pronounced when the analyzer is not
aligned with or orthogonal to the polarizer. In this image, the birefringence
axes are at 45
/C14to the entrance polarizer, and the analyzer is oriented at 30/C14
to the entrance polarization.
622 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Aaron D. Slepkov 622 04 October 2023 23:14:22
one to predict the effects of mixing various colors to create
new colors, the addition of retardances by layering mediawithout careful attention to layer orientation and sequenceleads to seemingly random outcomes. To put a ﬁne point onit, mixing blue paint with yellow paint leads to some shadeof green, but the “addition” of a blue-resulting PFC layerand a yellow-resulting PFC layer can result in any number ofcolors depending on the microscopic properties (thickness,birefringence, and alignment) and on the order of the layers.
A special case of predictable addition—or in this case,
subtraction—arises from the understanding that birefrin-gence axes are oriented at 90
/C14to each other. Thus, anyrotation of the birefringent material by 90/C14produces the
opposite retardance. When viewed through either open orclosed-gate arrangements, the coloration produced by agiven retardance is the same as that produced by its negative,and thus for single layers, a 90
/C14rotation reproduces the same
colors. This fact may be gleaned from the sin2(d) dependence
of the gate transmittance in Eqs. (3)and(5). However, if one
stacks a ﬁlm with another that is rotated at 90/C14, the result is a
subtraction of the two retardances. An example of this effectis shown in Fig. 8. The ﬁgure presents an addition/subtrac-
tion grid of two different adhesive tape samples overlappingto produce three distinctly colored layers that can be desig-nated as A, B, and A þB. An arrangement of layers rotated
by 90
/C14produces –A, –B, and –(A þB), but the same three
colors. If the tri-layer arrangements are overlapped, there areregions of complete subtraction where A and –A overlap to
null the retardance, and thus, no coloration is observed.
Likewise, a region of A þB can overlap with a region of –B
to produce the identical color as seen in an original A layer.This can prove useful when applied to thin layers that maybe difﬁcult to cut and place. Building up thickness viasequential layering of orthogonal orientations can producephysically thick layers with the birefringent properties ofmuch thinner ﬁlms.
V. OUTLOOK
The manipulation of birefringent ﬁlms for the purpose of
creating PFC images is fun and intellectually stimulating.Much of the nuanced physics of polarization, birefringence,retardance, and color theory can be observed in this accessi-ble yet expansive endeavor. The best part is that one neednot understand the scientiﬁc aspects of the phenomenon inorder to appreciate, or even master, the little-known artformof painting in polarization.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is dedicated to Austine Wood Comarow (1942-
2020). The project was inspired and sustained by Twitterposts and commentary from Professors John M. Dudley(Universite de Franche-Comte-CNRS), Nathalie Lidgi-Guigui (Universit /C19e Sorbonne Paris Nord), and Ariel
Levenson (CNRS). Professor Rayf Shiell (Trent) isgratefully acknowledged for formative manuscript reviewand guidance. This work was funded by NSERC Grant No.RGPIN/4491-2018.
a)ORCID: 0000-0001-5699-1403.
1F. Leclercq, “Arago, Biot, and Fresnel elucidate circular polarization,”
Rev. Hist. Sci. 66, 395–416 (2013).
2F. Arago, Memoire Sur Les Couleurs des Lames Minces (National Institute
for Sciences and Art, Paris, 1811).
3J. Z. Buchwald, “The battle between Arago and Biot over Fresnel,” J. Opt.
20, 109–117 (1989).
4E. Hecht, Optics , 4th ed. (Addison-Wesley, San Francisco, 2002).
5L. H. Adams and E. D. Williamson, “The relation between birefringence
and stress in various types of glass,” J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 9, 609–623
(1919), available at https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/24521146.pdf .
6H. F. Talbot, “XLIV. Experiments on light,” London, Edinburgh, Dublin
Philos. Mag. J. Sci. 5, 321–334 (1834).
7A. Michel-Levy and A. Lacroix, Les Mineraux Des Roches (Librairie
Polytechnique, Paris, 1888).
8J. Mann, Austine Wood Comarow: Paintings in Polarized Light (Wasabi
Publication, Las Vegas, 2005).
Fig. 8. (Color online) An addition/subtraction grid constructed by overlap-ping two different adhesive tape products in a co-aligned and orthogonal
arrangements. (a) A schematic of the four-layer orientation. (b) A photo-
graph of the arrangement sandwiched between open polarizers, with the
addition and subtraction of the layers labeled in a grid. (c) A photograph of
the arrangement between crossed polarizers.
623 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Aaron D. Slepkov 623 04 October 2023 23:14:22
9A. R. Wood, “Polage: A language of kinetic color,” M.Sc. thesis (Syracuse
University, Syracuse, 1981).
10See <https://www.austine.com/installations-custom-1 >for “a list of
selected exhibitions, commissions, and collections by Austine WoodComarow” (last accessed January 17, 2022).
11H. Kawamoto, “The history of liquid-crystal displays,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE (IEEE, 2002), Vol. 90, No. 4, pp. 460–500.
12A. D. Slepkov, “Quantitative measurement of birefringence in transparent
ﬁlms across the visible spectrum,” Am. J. Phys. 90(8), 625–634 (2022).
13See<https://www.luceo.jp/blogs/luceo-staff-blog-18th/ >for an example
of a commercial “polarization kaleidoscope” by Luceo Co. (last accessedJanuary 17, 2022).
14See <https://www.optics4kids.org/activities/hands-on/i-m-under-a-lot-of-
stress-here! >for “instructions to children on observing stress in plastic
cutlery using polarized light” (last accessed January 17, 2022).
15See<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photoelasticity >for the Wikipedia entry
on “photoelasticity” which includes a photograph of plastic cutlery observed
through a polarization gate (last accessed January 17, 2022).
16Linear polarizer sheets can be purchased online. The work presented here
used polaroid sheets sold by Aﬂash Photonics <http://polarization.com/
polarshop/ ; last accessed February 2022 >for approximately $15 USD per
30 cm length from a 43-cm wide roll.
17S. J. Edwards and A. J. Langley, “On producing colours using birefrin-gence property of transparent, colourless stretched cellophane,” Leonardo
14, 187–190 (1981).18M. Ortiz-Gutierrez, A. Olivares-Perez, and V. Sanchez-Villicana,
“Cellophane ﬁlm as half wave retarder of wide spectrum,” Opt. Mater. 17,
395–400 (2001).
19Note that in the case of biaxially oriented polypropylene, the term biaxial is a
reference to the direction of mechanical stress imparted to the extruding poly-
mer and not a reference to any optical properties. In fact, inasmuch as BOPP
ﬁlm is effectively a two-dimensional sample, it is optically uniaxial.
20P. Dias, A. Hiltner, E. Baer, J. Van Dun, H. Chen, and S. P. Chum,“Structure and properties of biaxially oriented polypropropylenes
(BOPP),” in ANTEC (Society of Plastics Engineers, 2006), pp. 2660–2664.
21F. Behroozi, “Soap bubbles in paintings: Art and science,” Am. J. Phys.
76, 1087–1091 (2008).
22H. Kubota, T. Ara, and H. Saito, “On the sensitive color of chromatic
polarization,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 41, 537–546 (1951).
23See <http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/phyopt/polint.html > for
“Polarization and interference colors” (last accessed December 20, 2021).
24A. Shah and P. Ghalsasi, “Use of interference colours to distinguishbetween fast and slow axes of a quarter wave plate,” Eur. J. Phys. 40,
065301 (2019).
25X. J. Yu and H. S. Kwok, “Optical wire-grid polarizers at oblique anglesof incidence,” J. Appl. Phys. 93, 4407–4412 (2003).
26A. Wood-Comarow, “Labyrinthe de Lumiere,” Leonardo 24, 84–86 (1991),
available at https://muse.jhu.edu/article/606470/pdf .
27R. C. Jones, “A new calculus for the treatment of optical systems I. Description
and discussion of the calculus,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. 31, 488–493 (1941).
624 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 8, August 2022 Aaron D. Slepkov 624 04 October 2023 23:14:22
