
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkMAY 01 2023
Paragliders' launch trajectory is universal 
Quentin Da Cruz Lopes ; Sophie Ramananarivo ; Caroline Cohen ; Michael Benzaquen
Am. J. Phys.  91, 340 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0101359
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Influence of dif ferent air inlet configurations of a paraglider ’s open airfoil performance
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2018)
A new algorithm for small object tracking based on super-resolution technique
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2017)
Answer to Question #69. Hovering birds
American Journal of Physics  (March 2001) 04 October 2023 22:51:50
Paragliders’ launch trajectory is universal
Quentin Da Cruz Lopes,a)Sophie Ramananarivo,b)Caroline Cohen,
and Michael Benzaquenc)
LadHyX UMR CNRS 7646, /C19Ecole polytechnique, 91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France
(Received 31 May 2022; accepted 11 January 2023)
We designed and built a reduced-scale model experiment to study the paragliding inﬂation and
launching phase at given traction force. We show that the launch trajectory of a single skin glider isuniversal, that is, independent of the exerted force. As a consequence, the length of the take-off run
required for the glider to reach its “ready to launch” vertical position is also universal. We
successfully compare our results to full-scale experiments and show that such universality can beunderstood through a simple theoretical model.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American
Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0101359
I. INTRODUCTION
Paragliding is a young adventure sport dating back to the
early 1980s, in which a lightweight wing with no rigid pri-mary structure is launched by a running pilot. For a physicist,
it is a truly endless source of fascinating unexplored prob-
lems, combining a variety of ﬁelds from ﬂuid mechanics toﬂuid-structure interactions, and including ﬂight mechanics,materials science, micrometeorology, and even game theoryin the context of understanding exploration-exploitationstrategies of thermal convection.
1,2Indeed, cross-country ﬂy-
ing combines climbs using thermal updrafts and glidesthrough stationary air. Race pilots seeking to cover the great-est possible distance must ﬁnd the right balance between the
individualistic strategy based on one’s knowledge to ﬁnd
the next nascent thermal, with the risk of missing out, andthe collective strategy consisting in following other pilotswho concentrate where the thermals are located with the riskof getting there too late.
Since the ﬁrst prototypes, paraglider wings have continu-
ously evolved, both in terms of performance and security.Most of the research done by paragliding manufacturers hasfocused on optimising wings for steady ﬂight phases,
3,4and
unsteady regimes have only received limited attention.5In
particular, many questions remain unsolved when it comesto the dynamics of stalls or wing collapses. Further researchmay, therefore, provide quantitative elements to improve thesafety of modern gliders, the airworthiness certiﬁcation ofwhich is now based on the rather qualitative feelings of testpilots. In addition, accidentology studies show that a sub-stantial fraction of accidents occur during take-off,
6,7which
makes the study of the launch phase crucial.
In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of the launching
phase of a single skin wing: How does a seemingly simple
piece of fabric inﬂate when pulled by the pilot to become areasonably stable aircraft in just a matter of seconds? Toanswer this question, we designed and built a reduced-scalemodel experiment and studied the paragliding inﬂation andlaunching phases at given traction forces. We found that thelaunch trajectory is universal—in the sense that it does notdepend on the strength of the exerted force—and, as a result,
neither does the distance required for the glider to reach its
“ready to launch” vertical position. Due to the limitations ofthe model experiment, namely, the difﬁculty of scaling downthe stiffness of the materials (fabric, lines linking the fabricto the risers which, in turn, are connected to the harness
8),we also performed full-scale experiments on the ﬁeld that
showed excellent agreement with the reduced-scale experi-
mental results.
II. REDUCED-SCALE EXPERIMENT
In order to work in a controlled environment to ensure
reproducibility, we started with a reduced-scale experiment inwhich a small single-skin paraglider (Oxy 0.5 model designedbyOpale Paramodels , see characteristics in Table I)i sp u l l e d
from its risers along a horizontal 3 m-long guide rail by a wire
and pulley system (Fig. 1). To minimize friction, the para-
glider is fastened to a ring looped around a string that servesas the guide.
For the experiment to be as realistic as possible, we chose
to work with a speciﬁed traction force rather than a speciﬁedvelocity. This is because, when pilots launch, they aim toexert a nearly constant physical effort in order to achievegood control of the wing. While such effort is most certainlynot perfectly constant over the launching phase, assumingconstant force is a good approximation. Here, the constant
force is provided by a falling mass Mattached to the wire.
During the launching phase, we identify two processes: (i)
the chambers ﬁll with air to give the aircraft its wing shape,thus allowing lift; and (ii) the “inﬂated” wing rises from thehorizontal to the vertical position. These two processes over-lap somewhat in time, but we analyze them as separatephases. Our choice of a single-skin glider results from thefact that the time overlap between phases (i) and (ii) isobserved to be much weaker compared to a regular double-skin glider due to the much faster dynamics of phase (i). In
the top left panels of Fig. 1, one can see that the glider is
fully inﬂated when the trailing edge used to track its positionleaves the ground. (This deﬁnes t¼0 in the following.) See
Sec.IVfor a discussion on regular double-surface gliders.
Figure 2(a) displays the dimensionless trajectory Y(X)o f
the trailing edge during launching runs with different valuesof the traction force F
O, ranging from 5.9 to 17.8 N. The
trailing edge position is tracked manually using ImageJ11for
image analysis. Note that the string that is used as a guiderail tends to distort a little under the pulling action of the
glider. To account for this upwards shift, we subtract the
height of the attachment point from that of the trailing edge.Strikingly, all the dimensionless trajectories fall on top ofeach other, thereby indicating that the dimensionless launchtrajectory is universal and does not depend on the traction
340 Am. J. Phys. 91(5), May 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 340 04 October 2023 22:51:50
force FO. However, the traction force does determine the
speed at which the paraglider moves along this universal tra-jectory, as shown in the time-evolution of its angle hðtÞin
Fig.2(b), where his the angle of the risers with respect to
the horizontal (Fig. 1). As shall be discussed in Sec. III,F
O
sets the characteristic time scale of the ascent s¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m‘=FOp
of a wing of mass m: The glider’s angle data all collapse on
a single curve when plotted as a function of t=s(the inset of
Fig.2(b)).
III. FULL-SCALE EXPERIMENT
Due to our concerns discussed above about downscaling
all the characteristics of s single-skin glider, we decided
to compare the above results to full-scale experiments (see
Fig.3). Using a 13 m2ﬂat single-surface glider (AirDesignVR
gliders UFO wing, see characteristics in Table I), we were
able to record a few launches on a calm day at Puy de D ^ome
(Auvergne, France). A seasoned test pilot was asked to
launch with low and then with strong traction strength,
respectively. Unlike in laboratory experiments, there was aslight wind of about 7 m s/C01, which we removed when com-
puting the horizontal velocity of the wing and plotting the
trajectories in Fig. 2(a)(in triangles). As one can see, the tra-
jectories collapse with their reduced-scale counterparts,
thereby validating the reduced-scale methodology.
Note that, in addition to the non-scalability of the stiff-
ness of the materials, the Oxy wing is not a perfect homo-thetic transformation of the UFO glider. While they are bothsingle skin wings with similar geometric features, differ-
ences exist (see Table I) that may lead to different aerody-
namic properties. It would be interesting to conduct moreexperiments on different gliders with a wider range of geo-
metric characteristics. This is, however, beyond the scope of
the present paper.
IV. THEORETICAL MODEL
In this section, we present a simple theoretical model to
account for the experimental results. We assume that a rigid
glider of mass mis characterized by its lift and drag coefﬁ-
cients,
12,13commonly denoted CLðaÞand CDðaÞ, respec-
tively, where ais the angle of attack (Fig. 4). The lift and
drag forces are applied to the point Mthat is called the center
of pressure or the aerodynamic center. They take the form
L¼1
2qSCLðaÞV2
Me?; (1a)
D¼1
2qSCDðaÞV2
Mek; (1b)
Fig. 1. Reduced-scale experiment (see Sec. I). The top left captions show
chronophotographies of the experiment with Mg¼7:0 N and 15.0 N. The
timestep between shots is 40 ms. The overall dimensions of the setup are 4 m
along xandy, and 0.5 m along z.
Fig. 2. (Color online) (a) Dimensionless trajectory of the trailing edge of a
reduced-scale glider during launching at constant traction force with
X¼x=‘andY¼y=‘, for different values of the traction force (denoted by
grayscale dots). Dimensionless trajectories for a real-scale AirDesignVRUFO
glider under low and strong traction force are shown with triangles. (b) Timeevolution of the glider’s angle h. Rescaling of time with the characteristic
timescale s¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
m‘=F
Op
collapses the data (inset).Table I. Glider characteristics for the Oxy 0.5 wing ( Opale Paramodels ) and
the UFO 13 ( AirDesign Gliders ).
Glider Oxy 0.5 UFO 13
Flat wingspan (m) 1.3 8.04
Flat area (m2) 0.5 13.0
Aspect ratio 4.2 4.9Average line length ‘(m)
a0.98 6.05
Chambers 17 27Weight (kg) 0.05 1.36
aFor the detailed line charts, see manufacturer’s websites (Refs. 9and10).
341 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Da Cruz Lopes et al. 341 04 October 2023 22:51:50
with qbeing the air density, Sbeing the projected wing area,
and VMbeing the magnitude of M’s velocity in the lab’s
frame of reference (or true airspeed). ekande?are the unit
vectors, respectively, parallel and orthogonal to the air ﬂow
in the frame of reference of the wing. Note that the projectedarea (the area of the fully inﬂated wing’s shadow on the
ground when the sun is at the zenith) is slightly smaller than
the ﬂat area (the total area of wing fabric when laid on theground) because of the proﬁle curvature. We further assume
that the center of pressure is attached to the traction point O
with a rigid weightless line of length ‘exerting a tension
6T
e¼7TeeronMand O, respectively, with er¼OM=
OM. Finally, Ois constrained to move along the xaxis
only (equivalently, Ois subject to a vertical force R, with
R¼Tesinh, see Fig. 4) and is pulled by a horizontal force
FO¼FOex.
Applying Newton’s second law to point M, together with
the angular momentum theorem relative to Oyields the fol-
lowing dimensionless equations (see the Appendix ):
_VOcosh/C0_h2þ1
cosh¼1
2qSV2
MðCLcosaþCDsinaÞ;
(2)
€hþtanh
cosh/C0_h2tanh¼1
2qSV2
MðCLsinaþcosatanh ½/C138
þCDsinatanh/C0cosa ½/C138 Þ; (3)
with the dimensionless variables t!t=s;V!Vs=‘with
s2¼m‘=FO;q!q‘3=m, and S!S=‘2, and where we have
neglected gravitational forces. FOonly appears in the equa-
tions through the timescale sused to normalize time, thereby
explaining the universality of the launch trajectories. For the
small-scale glider, s/C250:3½ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Np
/C138=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃFOps, while for the real
scale UFO wing s/C253½ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Np
/C138=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃFOps. This timescale enables
computation of the typical force that is required to launch ina given amount of time.
Equations (2)and(3)constitute a system of two coupled
ordinary differential equations with only h,V
Oand their
derivatives as unknowns (see the Appendix ). They can bejointly solved numerically for given functions CLðaÞand
CDðaÞ. However, typical lift and drag coefﬁcients are only
valid in stationary conditions. As such, they are not expectedto stand in the fundamentally unsteady conditions of the
launching phase. (For one thing, within the steady ﬂight the-
ory, the wing should stall in the very beginning of the launchas the angle of incidence a!p=2, which is obviously not
the case here.) Thus, Eqs. (2)and(3)are not expected to pro-
vide good quantitative ﬁts of the trajectories. Nonetheless,typical C
LandCDvalues found for this type of airfoil (see,
e.g., Ref. 14) give good qualitative agreement (see the
Appendix ) and are useful to identify the timescale sand
prove the experimentally observed universality.
Measuring unsteady lift and drag coefﬁcients would be
very interesting but beyond the scope of this paper. Unsteady
CLandCDare expected to be highly nontrivial as, in the
early stages, the wing is not fully inﬂated, and thus, its very
shape varies over time. (This might explain why the wing
does not stall.) We leave these points for future research.
V. DISCUSSION AND PERSPECTIVES
Let us ﬁrst stress the interest of such a study for students.
It provides a practical example of the use of Newtonianmechanics and the beneﬁts of nondimensionalization. It also
shows how simple experiments and models can provide an
understanding of a new ﬁeld: the physics of paragliding.
This study revealed a number of other exciting questions.
In particular, we observed that there is a minimum force
F
min
Obelow which there is no inﬂation, both in the reduced-
scale ( /C254 N) and real-sized experiments. Consequently, all
the results presented here only hold for FO>Fmin
O.
Measuring Fmin
Ois quite difﬁcult, because it is very sensitive
to variations in the initial conditions, in contrast with the tra-jectories which appear to be very robust. Characterising F
min
O
as a function of different parameters, in particular different
wings, would certainly be very interesting.
Among other interesting questions are the optimal folding of
the wing for a comfortable launch in strong wind conditions, or
the differences between regular double-skin and single skin
wings during unsteady phases, and the launching phase in par-ticular. Differences are certainly to be expected regarding the
F
min
O, which we phenomenologically observed to be larger for
regular double skin gliders. For certain gliders, it may even benecessary to brieﬂy pull on the A risers (front risers acting on
the leading edge) to set off the inﬂation phase. Furthermore,
single-surface gliders are known to launch much faster thantheir double-skin counterparts. This is often attributed to the fact
that they are lighter and, thus, have less inertial effects, but we
believe it can also be related to the fact that the inﬂation phaseis much faster, as argued in Sec. I. For regular double skin
gliders, the question of the simultaneity for the air-ﬁlling of the
chambers and the rising phases is complicated. Indeed, one
expects that the lift coefﬁcient grows progressively as the cham-
bers ﬁll with air, which explains why the wing starts to take off
Fig. 3. Pictures of the real scale experiment. The timestep between shots is 200 ms.
Fig. 4. Schematics supporting the theoretical model (see Sec. III).
342 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Da Cruz Lopes et al. 342 04 October 2023 22:51:50
before the glider is fully inﬂated. To quantitatively unravel the
role of these phases, one could think of combining high speed
camera ﬁlming of a static inﬂation experiment (in which the
glider is attached to the ground at its trailing edge), together
with an experiment on rigid wings (printed in 3D or cut out in
polystyrene), and compute the characteristic times of each iso-
lated phase to disentangle their interactions. One should bare in
mind that, while seemingly irrelevant in the present communica-
tion, the limitations to scale down the stiffness of the materials
in our experiments might have important implications on the
characteristics of the inﬂation phase. These ideas are left for
future research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors deeply thank Alexandre Darmon for agreeing
to serve as a test pilot during the real scale experiments andfor proofreading the manuscript as well as Henri Montel
(Freedom Parapente, Puy de D ^ome) for lending the gliders
and several discussions. The authors also thank Edgar
Pereyron for his contribution to improve the algorithm used
to solve Eqs. (2)and(3).
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
APPENDIX: DERIVATION OF THE GOVERNING
EQUATIONS
The angular momentum of the glider relative to Ois
m‘
2_hez. The forces acting on Min the non-inertial frame of
reference attached to Oare the lift and drag forces, as given
in Eqs. (1a)and(1b), the weight mg, the tension /C0Teer, and
the ﬁctitious force /C0m_VOex, where VOdenotes the velocity
of point Oin the inertial frame of reference. The angular
momentum theorem yieds
m‘€h¼Lsina/C0Dcosa/C0mgcoshþm_VOsinh;(A1)
where the right-hand side (upon multiplication by ‘) denotes
the torque on Mwith respect to O along ez. Newton’s second
law applied to point Malong eryields
/C0m‘_h2¼LcosaþDsina/C0mgsinh/C0Te
/C0m_VOcosh: (A2)
The angle of attack aand the true airspeed VMare kinemati-
cally related to hthrough the velocity composition law
cosa¼‘_h/C0VOsinhﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V2
Ocos2hþð‘_h/C0VOsinhÞ2q ;
sina¼/C0VOcoshﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
V2
Ocos2hþð‘_h/C0VOsinhÞ2q ; (A3)
V2
M¼V2
Ocos2hþð‘_h/C0VOsinhÞ2: (A4)
Finally, applying Newton’s second law to massless point O
yieldsTe¼FO
cosh; (A5)
which can be inserted into Eq. (A2) to eliminate Te.
Equations (A1) and(A2)—combined with Eqs. (1a),(1b),
(A3),(A4), and (A5)—constitute a system of two coupled
ordinary differential equations, with only h,VOand their
derivatives as unknowns. Isolating _V0in Eq. (A2) and insert-
ing it into Eq. (A1) ﬁnally yields
_~VOcosh¼_~h2
þ1
2~q~S~V2
MðCLðaÞcosaþCDðaÞsinaÞ
/C0~gsinh/C01
cosh; (A6)
€~hþtanh
cosh/C0_~h2
tanh
¼1
2~q~S~V2
MCLðaÞðsinaþcosatanhÞ ½
þCDðaÞðsinatanh/C0cosaÞ/C138
/C0~gðcoshþsinhtanhÞ; (A7)
where we have introduced the dimensionless variables
~t¼t=s;~V¼Vs=‘;_~h¼_hs;€~h¼€hs2;~g¼gs2=‘, and s2¼
m‘=FO;~q¼q‘3=mand ~S¼S=‘2. Equations (A6) and(A7)
are equivalent to Eqs. (2)and(3)in the main text, where all
the/C24have been dropped, and where the gravitational terms
have been set to zero, given that their contribution turns out
to be negligible (correction of less than 1%). A numerical
solution can be obtained using a standard RK45 method(explicit Runge–Kutta15) choosing, e.g., CL¼lLsin 2aand
CD¼lDsin2aþA, where Ais a constant (see Ref. 14).
Figure 5displays numerical results for different values of lD
andA. Again, we do not expect quantitative agreement with
the experimental trajectories for the reasons presented inSec. III. The theory is only intended to account for the uni-
versality through the identiﬁcation of the typical timescale s.
a)ORCID: 0000-0002-0783-7909.
b)ORCID: 0000-0003-1049-4131.
c)Electronic mail: michael.benzaquen@polytechnique.edu, ORCID: 0000-
0002-9751-7625.Fig. 5. (Color online) Numerical solution of Eqs. (2)and (3)for
lL¼4;lD¼0:2, and A¼3 (solid yellow line), together with the experi-
mental results of Fig. 2(light gray markers). The blue and red solutions are
obtained by varying the parameters and show that one can either match theinitial slope (dotted blue line) by relatively increasing drag (same as solid yel-
low but with A¼4.5) or approach the ﬁnal plateau (dashed red line) by rela-
tively increasing lift (same as solid yellow but with l
L¼8), but not both.
343 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Da Cruz Lopes et al. 343 04 October 2023 22:51:50
1Nicholas Landell-Mills, Paragliding explained by Newtonian physics
(ResearchGate, Berlin, 2021).
2Menegoz Pierre-Paul and Jacques Alain, “Le manuel du vol libre deltaparapente,” F/C19ed/C19eration Franc ¸aise du Vol Libre , 2020th ed. (Flying Pages
Europe, France, 2005).
3Rene Falquier, “Longitudinal ﬂight mechanics of paraglider systems” (2019),<https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid ¼diva2:1359785 >.
4Diego Muniz Benedetti, Paragliders Flight Dynamics (Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Minas Gerais, 2012).
5Marcel M €uller, Abid Ali, and Alfred Tareilus, “Modelling and simulation
of a paraglider ﬂight,” in Proceedings of 9th EUROSIM Congress on
Modelling and Simulation (2018), p. 142.
6Robin Soleil, “Accidentologie du parapente chez les comp /C19etiteurs” (2016),
<https://www.academia.edu/download/84701864/document.pdf >.
7Gunter Fasching, Gerhard Schippinger, and Rudolf Pretscher, “Paragliding
accidents in remote areas,” Wilderness Environ. Med. 8(3), 129–133 (1997).
8See<https://paragliding4.me/about-ﬂying/paraglider-design >for information
on paraglider architecture and lexicon.9AD UFO Brochure, “Airdesign gliders” (2022), <https://ventus.airde-
sign.at/index.php/s/b8JVCZ8yWARu6Rs?path ¼%2Fbrochures >.
10Oxy 0.5 Brochure, “Opale paramodels” (2022), <https://www.opale-
paramodels.com/fr/ailes-parapente-paramoteur-rc/37-oxy-05-3760245320116.html >.
11ImageJ, “Features” (2022), <https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/ >.
12J. Ross, “Computational aerodynamics in the design and analysis
of ram-air inﬂated wings,” in proceedings of 12th AIAA
Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Tec hnology Conference (1993),
pp. 10–13.
13Joan Marc Moreno Colilles, “Aerodynamic performance of a para-
glider wing,” B.S. thesis, Universitat Polite `cnica de Catalunya,
Catalunya, 2017.
14Sarah Becker, “Experimental study of paraglider aerodynamics,” M.S. the-sis, Imperial College London, Department of Aeronautics, End €ustri
M€uhendisli /C21gi B €ol€um€u, London, 2017.
15John Charles Butcher, Numerical Methods for Ordinary Differential
Equations (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2016).
344 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 Da Cruz Lopes et al. 344 04 October 2023 22:51:50
