
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| MARCH 01 2023
Producing slow light in warm alkali vapor using
electromagnetically induced transparency 
Kenneth DeRose ; Kefeng Jiang ; Jianqiao Li ; Macbeth Julius ; Linzhao Zhuo ; Scott W enner  
 ; Samir Bali  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 193–205 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0128967
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Electric field metrology for SI traceability: Systematic measurement uncertainties in electromagnetically
induced transparency in atomic vapor
J. Appl. Phys.  (June 2017)
Electromagnetically induced transparency in a Λ-type molecular system with permanent dipole moments
revisited
J. Chem. Phys.  (September 2012)
Weak electric-field detection with sub-1 Hz resolution at radio frequencies using a Rydberg atom-based
mixer
AIP Advances  (April 2019) 04 October 2023 22:50:10
Producing slow light in warm alkali vapor using electromagnetically
induced transparency
Kenneth DeRose, Kefeng Jiang, Jianqiao Li,Macbeth Julius, Linzhao Zhuo, Scott Wenner,a)
and Samir Balib)
Department of Physics, Miami University, Oxford, Ohio 45056-1866
(Received 2 October 2022; accepted 27 November 2022)
We present undergraduate-friendly instructions on how to produce light pulses propagating through
warm Rubidium vapor with speeds less than 400 m/s, i.e., nearly a million times slower than c.W e
elucidate the role played by electromagnetically induced transparency (EIT) in producing slow
light pulses and discuss how to achieve the required experimental conditions. The optical setup is
presented, and details provided for preparation of pump, probe, and reference pulses of the requiredsize, frequency, intensity, temporal width, and polarization purity. EIT-based slow light pulses
provide the most widely studied architecture for creating quantum memories. Therefore, the basic
concepts presented here are useful for physics and engineering majors who wish to get involved inthe development of cutting-edge quantum technologies.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0128967
I. INTRODUCTION
It has been two decades since the ﬁrst demonstration of
slow optical pulses propagating through atomic media.1,2
Slow light was revealed as the striking consequence of a
quantum mechanical phenomenon in light–matter interaction
known as EIT, i.e., electromagnetically induced transpar-ency. EIT arises from the interference between probabilityamplitudes for absorption pathways that are simultaneously
excited by two resonant light ﬁelds—one strong, referred to
as the pump (or coupling) ﬁeld, and the other weak, referredto as the probe.
3,4EIT and slow light in warm alkali vapor
continue to be central topics of research in quantum informa-
tion and quantum technology, particularly for building robustquantum memories,
5–7and stable photon-shot-noise-limited
electromagnetic ﬁeld sensors using Rydberg atoms.8In Ref.
6, for instance, the authors provide an overview of current
approaches to quantum memory and state that “although allof these approaches have been studied and demonstrated,EIT remains the most popular scheme for quantum memo-
ry,” because, “in comparison to the other approaches, the
EIT approach has a long storage time and is a relativelyeasy-to-implement and inexpensive solution.”
An excellent article on EIT-based experiments for under-
graduate laboratories was published just over a decade ago.
9
Elegant EIT-based experiments carried out at undergraduateinstitutions have also been reported.
10However, an
undergraduate-friendly experimental description of slowlight in atomic vapor does not exist. In this paper, we
endeavor to ﬁll this gap. This is important because an
increasing number of physics and engineering majors wishto get involved in the development of cutting-edge quantumtechnologies.
There are several pedagogical advantages to introducing
the concepts of EIT and slow light in an optics class for
undergraduate seniors and ﬁrst/second-year graduate stu-dents. For instance, in the advanced lecture/lab course“Optics and Laser Physics” that we teach at Miami
University, students often ask, “We’ve read about laser
applications in imaging, communications and medicine…can you tell us about quantum applications we haven’t heardof?” EIT and slow light can provide a satisfying answer to
this question. EIT physics is a natural extension to what
these students have already learned about light–matter inter-action. Early in the semester, they are introduced topopulation-rate equations for a laser system, which sets thestage for an EIT-based slow light system, since the simplestmodel for either system is provided by a three-level atom.Furthermore, students know about group versus phase veloc-ity, and therefore have all the necessary background to learnabout how a steep positive gradient of the refractive indexwithin a narrow EIT spectral window can lead to a dramati-cally slow group velocity.
In this article, we state the relevant theoretical results for
EIT and slow light, and describe our experimental setup forproducing slow light pulses with group velocities less than400 m/s. A price list for parts is included in the online sup-
plementary material.
11
II. THEORETICAL DESCRIPTION
The theory behind EIT and slow light has been explained
in several high-quality undergraduate-friendly articles (see,for example, Refs. 9and 12–15 ) including a textbook-
treatment in Ref. 16, which is amenable to seniors. Here, we
summarize the relevant results. A more complete derivationcan be found in the online supplementary material.
11
A. Three-level atom model
Following the treatment in Ref. 16, we depict a ﬁctitious
three-level atom in Fig. 1, in which transitions are allowed
between states 1 and 3 and between states 2 and 3, butnot between states 1 and 2. This is the so-called lambda-sys-tem because the lower levels 1 and 2 have close-lying ener-
gies, resulting in a K-shaped conﬁguration. The energy
differences between levels 3 and 1, 3 and 2, and 2 and 1 are/C22hx
31;/C22hx32, and /C22hx21, respectively. The standard EIT exper-
iment consists of a sample of such atoms illuminated by astrong coupling (or pump) laser of frequency x
cand a weak
probe laser of frequency xp, both tuned to near-resonance
withj3ifrom levels j2iandj1irespectively. The laser detun-
ings are Dc/C17xc/C0x32andDp/C17xp/C0x31. We assume that
193 Am. J. Phys. 91(3), March 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 193 04 October 2023 22:50:10
the pump beam only addresses the coupling transition j2i
!j3iand the probe beam only addresses the j1i!j 3itran-
sition. This may be satisﬁed by ensuring that the interaction
between the pump beam and the probe transition, and viceversa, is forbidden by quantum mechanical selection rules(as in Zeeman EIT, discussed in detail in Sec. III A below).
Alternatively, this interaction may be negligible because the
two transitions x
31andx32are signiﬁcantly different (as in
hyperﬁne EIT, see Sec. III A). In either situation, the pump
frequency is ﬁxed, while the probe frequency is scanned so
that the two-photon detuning D0, deﬁned as D0/C17Dp/C0Dc
¼xp/C0xc/C0x21, passes through zero (two-photon reso-
nance). The probe absorption is measured as a function ofthis scanning probe frequency.
In the supplementary material, Secs. S1A and S1B,11we
write the Hamiltonian for an illuminated three-level atom,
assuming that the incident ﬁeld-induced electric dipole is thepredominant light–atom interaction. We calculate the eige-nenergies and eigenstates in Eqs. (S9)–(S11), taking the
pump and probe beams to be on-resonance for simplicity
(i.e., the two-photon detuning D
0is zero). One of the eigen-
states is a “dark” state, which is a coherent superposition of
the two ground states j1iandj2i. This dark state has no
quantum overlap with the excited state j3i. Thus, an atom,
once it is transferred to the dark state upon interaction withthe light ﬁelds, stays there, no longer able to absorb a probe
photon. In general, for non-zero detunings D
pandDc, the
steady-state dark state is formed at two-photon resonanceD
0¼0. Note that in the absence of the pump, the weak reso-
nant probe would be completely absorbed. Thus, the pump
laser “coherently prepares” the atoms to be transparent to the
probe—this is EIT.
In order to calculate the spectral width of the transparency
window, we must take into account the decay of the light-induced dipole moment due to various decohering processes
(also called damping, or relaxation, processes). Such pro-
cesses may arise from atomic motion which may, for exam-ple, cause the atom to leave the illuminated region, and thelight–atom interaction to cease altogether. Similarly, elastic
and inelastic collisions with other atoms and with the con-
tainer walls, and other processes such as spontaneous emis-sion, affect the phase and amplitude of the light-induceddipole moment. These mechanisms are discussed in more
detail in Secs. III B andIII C below. We denote all decay
processes from 3 !1 and from 3 !2 by the optical deco-
herence rates c
13andc23, respectively. The two ground states
are close-lying, so that non-optical processes, such as colli-
sions, may sufﬁce to cause interchange between the twostates—we denote this two-way 1 $2 decay by the ground
state decoherence rate c
12. In dilute samples where the densi-
ties are not so high, non-optical damping processes (e.g., col-
lisions between ground state atoms) begin to dominate overoptical damping processes e.g., spontaneous emission or
Doppler broadening, c12is much smaller than c13andc23.
This is an important requirement for EIT which is satisﬁed in
our experiments, see Sec. III C below.
We show in Secs. S1C–S1D of the supplementary mate-
rial11that the density matrix formalism allows for simple
phenomenological inclusion of decay processes into the cal-
culation of the probe-induced atomic dipole moment andpolarizability. This allows us to deduce the complex refrac-
tive index nðx
pÞ¼nrðxpÞþiniðxpÞ. The imaginary part ni
yields the absorption spectrum aðxpÞ. The complex refrac-
tive index is a convenient way to express something well
known: Where there is dispersion nrðxÞ, there must be
absorption a. This is owing to causality-based Kramers–
Kronig relations between the real and imaginary parts of the
refractive index.17We calculate the absorption aðxpÞand
real refractive index nrðxpÞseen by the weak probe (see
Eqs. (S22) and (S23)) propagating through a sample of
K-atoms, which is coherently prepared by a strong pump
beam in a dark state, as mentioned above. In Secs. II Band
II Cbelow, we discuss some important limiting situations
which will be probed by experiments.
B. Absorption and refractive index with pump field off
When the coupling ﬁeld (or pump) is off, no EIT occurs.
We obtain the usual results for probe absorption and real
refractive index, which are plotted in Figs. 2(a)and2(b),
a/C0!Xc¼0Nxp
/C150cjl13j2
/C22hc13
Dp2þc132; (1)
nr/C0!Xc¼01/C0N
2/C150jl13j2
/C22hDp
Dp2þc132: (2)
Here, Xcis the coupling beam Rabi frequency deﬁned as
Xc/C17~d32/C1~/C15cEc=2/C22h, where ~d32is the transition dipole
moment between levels j2iandj3i;~/C15cis the unit polarization
vector in the direction of the coupling electric ﬁeld, and /C22his
Fig. 1. Three-level atom in the K-shaped conﬁguration.
Fig. 2. The probe absorption coefﬁcient a(left panel) in cm/C01and real refrac-
tive index nr(right panel), versus probe detuning Dp¼xp/C0x31as predicted
by Eqs. (1)–(4) . (a) and (b) The case of “no pump” from Eqs. (1)and(2).( c )
and (d) The “EIT case” from Eqs. (3)and(4)with parameter values from our
experiments: Dc¼0;jXcj=2p¼4M H z , xp=2p¼3:77/C21014Hz,N¼3:36
/C21011/cm3,c13=2p¼300 MHz, c12=2p¼3k H z , jl13j¼2:54/C210/C029C.m.
(e) and (f) Magniﬁed view of sharp EIT features in (c) and (d).
194 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 194 04 October 2023 22:50:10
Planck’s constant divided by 2 p.18Nis the number of atomic
dipoles per unit volume, cis the speed of light in vacuum, /C150
is the electric permittivity of vacuum, and l13is deﬁned as
the projection of the induced probe dipole moment on thedirection of the probe ﬁeld polarization.
Equation (1), plotted in Fig. 2(a), depicts the expected
Lorentzian absorptive line shape, with a half width at half
maximum (HWHM) c
13and a maximum at Dp¼0. Equation
(2), plotted in Fig. 2(b), depicts the expected dispersive line
shape around probe-resonance, again with a HWHM of c13.I n
the immediate vicinity of resonance Dp/C250, we see that
nr!1/C0Njl13j2Dp=ð2/C150/C22hc132Þ, i.e., nrðxpÞhas a negative
slope. This is the well-known “anomalous dispersion” effect
that occurs close to an atomic resonance and in which nr
decreases with increasing optical frequency. By contrast, as we
move further away from resonance we see that nrincreases
with frequency on either side. This is the normal dispersion,consistent with the classic experiment of propagating white
light through a glass prism and observing that red light devi-
ates the least and blue the most.
C. Absorption and refractive index with pump field on
When the strong coupling ﬁeld is on, and assumed to be
on-resonance for simplicity ( D
c¼0), we obtain for the probe
absorption aðxpÞand real refractive index nrðxpÞin the
“weak-probe approximation” ( Xp/C28Xc; here, Xpis the
probe Rabi frequency and is deﬁned as Xp/C17~d31/C1~/C15pEp=2/C22h,
where ~d31is the transition dipole moment between levels j1i
andj3i, and ~/C15pis the unit polarization vector in the direction
of the probe electric ﬁeld18),
aðxpÞ¼Nxp
/C150cjl13j2
/C22h
/C2c13Dp2þc12ðc12c13þjXcj2Þ
Dp2/C0c12c13/C0jXcj2hi2
þDp2c12þc13 ½/C1382;
(3)
nrðxpÞ¼1/C0N
2/C150jl13j2
/C22h
/C2DpðDp2/C0jXcj2þc2
12Þ
Dp2/C0c12c13/C0jXcj2hi2
þDp2c12þc13 ½/C1382:
(4)
Equations (3)and (4)are plotted in Figs. 2(c)–2(f) .
Equations (S22) and (S23) are generalized forms of Eqs. (3)
and(4)forDc6¼0.
The absorption aand refractive index nrin the lower pan-
els of Fig. 2are strikingly different from the top panel where
the coupling ﬁeld is off. It is instructive to verify that Eqs.(1)–(4) satisfy the Kramers–Kronig relations.17
D. The EIT “window”
EIT manifests itself as a dramatic drop in the absorption
aðxpÞin Figs. 2(c) and2(e) when the coupling and probe
beams are on-resonance. In our experiments, c12=2p/C24few
kHz,jXcj=2p/C24few MHz, c13=2p/C24few hundred MHz, and
jDpj=2p/C20100 kHz, so that we verify the “strong coupling
ﬁeld approximation,”jXcj/C29jDpj;c12; (5)
which is one of two conditions (see Eq. (11)below) that Xc
must satisfy in order to produce slow light. Using c12/C28c13,
we ﬁnd from Eq. (3), in the Dp!0 limit,
a!Nxp
/C150cjl13j2
/C22hc12
jXcj2/C250; (6)
which yields transparency in a narrow “EIT window.”
A simple approximate expression for the EIT linewidth
CEIT(see Fig. 2(e)) may be obtained by setting Dp¼0 in Eq.
(S22) while allowing Dcto vary around the two-photon reso-
nance condition Dp/C0Dc¼0,
a/C0!Dp¼0aXc¼01/C0jXcj2
c13c12þjXcj2
c13
Dc2þc12þjXcj2
c13 !22
6666643
777775;(7)
where aXc¼0¼Nxpjl13j2=ð/C150c/C22hc13Þis obtained by setting
Dp¼0 in Eq. (1). The ﬁrst term inside the parentheses in
Eq.(7)represents the baseline absorption without EIT. The
second term is the EIT window depicted in Fig. 2(e), which
is a Lorentzian with full-width-half-maximum CEITgiven by
CEIT¼2c12þjXcj2
c13 !
: (8)
In Eq. (8),Xcdepends on the pump intensity I(see Eq. (16)
below), so that the EIT window broadens when the intensity ofthe pump beam increases. Upon substituting typical experimen-tal parameter values (see caption under Fig. 2) into the approxi-
mate expression in Eq. (8),w ep r e d i c t C
EIT/C25100 kHz for the
EIT window. This is in close agreement with Eq. (3),w h i c hi s
plotted in Fig. 2(e). The probe absorption ais minimum when
Dcis minimum, so that an expression for the EIT contrast, or
amplitude of the transparency window, denoted by C(see Fig.
2(e)) may be simply obtained by setting Dc¼0 in the second
term of Eq. (7):C¼jXcj2=ðc13c12þjXcj2Þwhich, for the
typical experimental-parameter values in the Fig. 2 caption,
predicts /C25100% transparency.
In practice, the observed contrast and linewidth are much
lower (see Sec. VI). This is because, in steady-state, the frac-
tion of atoms settling in the dark state is signiﬁcantlyreduced for reasons discussed in Sec. III B. In short, our the-
ory is based on a closed three-level model, whereas, in real
atoms, many energy levels are addressed by the laser ﬁelds.
This provides extraneous energy-levels to which the popula-tion can leak, severely reducing contrast (in our experimentsthe maximum contrast is about 25%). The lowered contrast,in turn, leads to a signiﬁcant reduction in the observed EITlinewidth: Only the probe spectral components that lie at thecenter of the EIT window can propagate through and aredetectable in transmission (though considerably reduced inintensity), while frequency components near the edge of thewindow are too heavily attenuated to be detected.
19,20
Moreover, in Ref. 19it is shown that the power-broadened
component of the linewidth in Eq. (8)is estimated to reduce
by a factorﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ODp
, where ODis the on-resonance optical
depth seen by the probe as it traverses an atom sample of
195 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 195 04 October 2023 22:50:10
length Lwith the coupling beam turned off (see supplemen-
tary material Notes, Sec. S1 D). The ODis deﬁned by the
product of Lwith the on-resonance probe absorption aXc¼0
(see Eq. (7)above): OD¼LaXc¼0¼Nxpjl13j2L=ð/C150c/C22hc13Þ.
To take this attenuation into account, we amend Eq. (8)to
CEIT¼2c12þjXcj2
c13ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ODp !
; (9)
where the power-broadened term is identical to Eq. (5) in
Ref.5and Eq. (2) in Ref. 19.
E. The refractive index and slow light
We now shift focus to the real refractive index nr(Eq.
(4)), plotted in Figs. 2(d) and2(f). In particular, using Eq.
(5), we ﬁnd that a strong coupling ﬁeld induces a positive
slope in nrwithin the narrow EIT window,
nr/C0!Dp/C2401þN
2/C150jl13j2
/C22hDp
jXcj2; (10)
as depicted in Fig. 2(f). We see from Eq. (10) that, if we
ensure that the coupling ﬁeld satisﬁes the condition,
jXcj2/C28Njl13j2
2/C150/C22hxp; (11)
we may produce a steep positive gradient about Dp/C240. The
group velocity of light vgis deﬁned by the relation
vg=c/C17ðnrþxpdnr=dxpÞ/C01. A steep positive gradient,
therefore, leads to a signiﬁcantly reduced group velocity forthe probe. Applying Eqs. (10)and(11), we have
vg
c/C25jXcj2=Njl13j2
2/C150/C22hxp !
/C281: (12)
From the deﬁnition of the on-resonance optical depth OD
above, and assuming that the power-broadened term in Eq.(9)is dominant, we may re-cast Eq. (12)as
vg
c¼CEITﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ODpL
c/I
N; (13)
where we have used Eq. (16). This means that, when going
through the sample, the probe light is delayed by a time sd,
given by20
sd¼L
vg/C24ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ODp
CEIT/NL
I: (14)
Thus, the narrower the EIT window, the larger the pulse-
delay sd.21See Ref. 22and Sec. 4.1 of Ref. 5for more accu-
rate predictions of the maximum achievable sd, which are
achieved by making detailed measurements of the EIT line-shape and contrast, and incorporating some of these empiri-cal values into the theory.
We wish to clarify two issues that often confuse students.
First, the dramatic changes in n
rnear resonance do not much
impact the phase velocity of light ( c=nr), because nrnever
signiﬁcantly departs from unity for a dilute vapor—this isclearly visible in Figs. 2(d)and2(f). No physical signiﬁcanceis ascribed to the phase velocity, so that the fact that n
rdips
below unity, causing the phase velocity to exceed c,i sn o
cause for alarm. Second, the deﬁnition of vgabove suggests
that when dnr=dxis negative, as is the case near-resonance
just outside the EIT window, the group velocity may, in prin-
ciple, exceed the phase velocity and even c. However, out-
side the EIT window the absorption is high; thus, no signal is
actually able to propagate faster than c.15
F. Stored light and EIT-based quantum memory
In effect, a pulse of probe light is slowed and stored in the
sample for a time sd,20and the medium then acts as a quan-
tum memory where information can be stored. Notice that
the pulse undergoes a dramatic spatial compression insidethe sample: The front end slows down upon entry into the
sample and propagates at v
g, even as the pulse-rear, which is
still outside, propagates at c. The compression factor is given
byLp=L0¼vg=cwhere Lpis the length of the compressed
pulse inside the medium and L0is the free-space pulse
length.20
However, from Sec. II Dit is clear that Eq. (14) and the
subsequent discussion apply only to a probe pulse for which
the frequency bandwidth sp/C01ﬁts within the EIT linewidth
CEIT, i.e., for a pulse such that sp/C01/C20CEIT. In other words,
ifspis so short that the probe bandwidth is broader than
CEIT, then the probe frequency components outside the trans-
parency window suffer signiﬁcant absorption, causing the
pulse to become distorted. Substituting this condition in Eq.
(14), we ﬁnd23
sp/C01sd/C20ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ODp
: (15)
This relation between the bandwidth of the probe pulse and
the pulse delay is known as the “delay-bandwidth product,”which is a ﬁgure of merit for a storage/memory device, as it
is a measure of how many probe pulses ﬁt within the sample
(without being absorbed to the extent that they undergo dis-tortion).
5,20A drawback of EIT-based quantum memory is
that, owing to the narrow bandwidth requirements of EIT,
this product remains low, e.g., for our longest observed sdof
68ls (see Fig. 9(b)) and sp¼170ls (see Sec. IV E),
the delay-bandwidth product is 0.4. In our experiments,ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ODp
/C255 (see Sec. VII A ), so Eq. (15)is satisﬁed. Our OD
and delay-bandwidth product are comparable to previous
values reported for EIT-based quantum memory in warm
87Rb vapor.5,24
III. THREE-LEVEL ATOMS: IMPLEMENTATION
IN THE LAB
In the lab, Rubidium is a popular choice of alkali, owing
to the ready availability of inexpensive single mode diode
lasers at the resonance wavelength for transitions from the
52S1=2ground state to the 52P1=2excited state (D1-transition;
795 nm) or the 52P3=2excited state (D2-transition; 780 nm).
Figure 3shows the hyperﬁne energy-level structure for both
stable isotopes85Rb (nuclear spin I ¼5=2) and87Rb (I
¼7=2).25
Our experiments are performed on the D1 transition
ð52S1=2;Fg¼2Þ!ð 52P1=2;Fe¼1Þin87Rb atoms. The
hyperﬁne D1 transition for87Rb involves the 52S1=2ground
state and the 52P1=2excited state, which are split by the
interaction of the valence electron’s total angular momentum
196 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 196 04 October 2023 22:50:10
(orbital þspin) with the nuclear spin, creating Fg¼1;2
ground energy states (separated by 6.8 GHz), and Fe¼1;2
excited energy states (separated by 815 MHz). Each hyper-ﬁne state Fhas 2 Fþ1 degenerate substates with quantum
number m
Franging from mF¼/C0FtoFin increments of 1.
Measurement will ﬁnd the atom with an angular momentum
component mF/C22halong a chosen quantization axis—we
choose zas our axis of quantization. For the Fg¼2 ground
state, for example, ﬁve magnetic substates are revealed in
the presence of a weak external magnetic ﬁeld Bz(along z)
which lifts the degeneracy by imparting a Zeeman shiftDE¼g
flBmFgBzto each magnetic sub-level. Here, gfis the
Lande g-factor for the hyperﬁne state ( gf¼1/2 for Fg¼2),
lBis the Bohr magneton (9 :274/C210/C024J/T), and mFgis
the magnetic sub-level number. The Zeeman shifts betweenthe magnetic sub-levels of the F
g¼2 ground state are
7/C2109Hz/T, resulting in a shift of 0.7 kHz when the ﬁeld is
10/C07T (i.e., 1 mG).25
A pump or probe laser tuned near-resonance to a particular
Fg!Fetransition pumps other close-lying Festates off-
resonantly, creating extraneous channels for atomic popula-tion leakage, which diminishes the steady-state fraction of
atoms in the dark state. The87Rb D1 transition is advanta-
geous in that respect because the Felevel-separation of
815 MHz is largest, compared to that of the D1 transition in
85Rb (362 MHz), and of the D2 transitions (Fig. 3). See Sec.
IV C for further details.
A. Zeeman EIT: Spin polarization via optical pumping
Three-level schemes with alkali atoms for EIT-based slow
light experiments fall into two categories: Hyperﬁne EIT and
Zeeman EIT. Hyperﬁne EIT with87Rb is depicted in Fig.
4(a). A strong pump beam (coupling laser; solid line) is
tuned to one Fg!Fetransition, while a weak beam (probe;
dashed line) is tuned to the other transition, 6.83 GHz apart.The probe is created using an electro-optic modulator to splitoff a small amount of the coupling beam, or by using two
phase-locked lasers, each tuned to either transition. Zeeman
EIT, depicted in Fig. 4(b), is less resource-intensive, requir-
ing a single passively-stable laser system and less expensiveacousto-optical modulators. Hence, we conﬁne our attention
to this method. Zeeman EIT relies upon the optical pumping
of the magnetic Zeeman sub-levels created by applying aweak external magnetic ﬁeld B
z, using a strong couplingbeam and a weak probe beam of mutually orthogonal
circular-polarization (one beam rþ, the other r/C0). Both
beams propagate collinearly with Bz.
Figure 4(b) depicts a strong rþcoupling ﬁeld (solid
arrows) and weak r/C0probe ﬁeld (dashed arrows), tuned to
near-resonance with the ð52S1=2;Fg¼2Þ!ð 52P1=2;Fe¼1Þ
transition.25,26The dipole selection rules for transitions
induced between magnetic substates by rþðr/C0Þlight are
Dm¼þ1ð/C01Þfor absorption and Dm¼/C01ðþ1Þfor stimu-
lated emission, in addition to the Dm¼0;61 selection rule
for spontaneous emission transitions.25This means that after
many absorption–emission cycles have occurred, the strong
rþﬁeld optically pumps the atoms into the mFg¼0 sub-
state. From here, the pump excites the atoms to the mFe¼1
sub-state, which is followed either by spontaneous decay tothem
Fg¼1;2 spin sub-states (where they stay) or by emis-
sion back into the mFg¼0 state (in which case they are re-
excited). Eventually, after a time that is long compared tothe excited state lifetime of 27.7 ns for the Rb D1 line, theatoms accumulate into the m
Fg¼1;2 spin sub-states (typi-
cally, after pumping on a time-scale of ms). The action of
the weak r/C0probe is to optically pump some of these atoms
toward lower mFg-states. Eventually, in the steady-state, the
atomic population is concentrated in the mFg¼0;2 spin sub-
states. Thus, the atom is “spin-polarized” via optical
pumping.27
Indeed, the ideal three-level lambda system (states
j1i;j2i, and j3iin Fig. 1) is well-approximated by the
ground states mFg¼2;0 and the excited state mFe¼1. In
Fig.4(b), the pump (thick solid arrow) and probe (rightmost
dashed arrow) are highlighted. The method for ﬁne-tuning
the pump and probe laser frequencies to resonance with these
particular Zeeman sub-levels is described in Sec. IV C.
These approximate three-level atoms then evolve into thedark state, enabling EIT and slow light. Factors causing spin
relaxation that reduce the dark state population are discussed
in Sec. III B below.
Note that the assumption made at the beginning of Sec. II,
that the coupling beam only addresses levels j2iandj3i, and
the probe beam only addresses levels j1iandj3i, is automati-
cally satisﬁed in Zeeman EIT because r
þpump photons can-
not be absorbed by the jmFg¼2i!j mFe¼1itransition and
r/C0probe photons cannot be absorbed by the jmFg¼0i
!jmFe¼1itransition. The assumption is also satisﬁed in
Fig. 3. Rb energy-levels with hyperﬁne structure.
Fig. 4. Three-level lambda schemes for (a) hyperﬁne EIT and (b) Zeeman
EIT. In (b), the transition strength between a pair of magnetic sub-states
depends on both the light polarization and the magnetic quantum numbers
of the two levels involved. The relative strengths are indicated for rþ(solid
lines), r/C0(dashed lines), and linear ( p; dotted lines) polarizations of light
(Ref. 25,26). The ground states mFg¼2;0 and the excited state mFe¼1
approximate the three levels j1i;j2i;j3iin Fig. 1(a), respectively.
197 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 197 04 October 2023 22:50:10
the case of hyperﬁne EIT, where the 6.83 GHz difference
between the pump and probe frequencies in Fig. 4(a)is large
enough that the pump beam experiences negligible absorp-
tion on the probe transition, and vice versa.
B. Spin relaxation mechanisms: Role of buffer gas
There are several spin-depolarization mechanisms that
reduce the EIT contrast and affect its linewidth. The spin-
polarized Rb atoms prepared in the previous subsection exist
within the sample volume that is jointly illuminated by the
pump and probe beams. Typically, in a glass cell ﬁlled with
warm alkali vapor, this volume is the central part of the cell.
However, the atoms are moving at thermal speeds, so that
the polarized atoms can exit the illuminated volume.
Collisions with the glass wall destroy the atoms’ polariza-
tion,28and these unpolarized atoms may subsequently re-
enter the illuminated region. These transit-time effectsreduce the sample polarization.
29Further, there are spin-
exchange collisions between spin-polarized Rb atoms which
can redistribute the populations in the magnetic sub-states,
causing depolarization.28
There are two commonly used approaches to suppress the
spin-depolarizing effects described above:27(i) include an
inert buffer gas such as Ne, He, or Ar in the Rb vapor cell or
(ii) coat the inside of the glass vapor cell with an anti-
relaxation coating such as parafﬁn.
Coated cells can yield signiﬁcantly longer spin coherence
times than buffer gas cells because the parafﬁn coating sup-
presses the Rb spin-depolarization via “softer” atom-wall
collisions. However, the light-Rb atom interaction dynamics
in coated cells is more complicated, yielding a dual-
structured EIT lineshape with a narrow central peak sitting
atop a broad pedestal (see, for example, Ref. 5and referen-
ces therein). The broad pedestal is due to Rb atoms interact-
ing with light during a one-time pass through the light
beams. The narrow peak, on the other hand, results from
contributions by polarized Rb atoms that transit in and out
repeatedly through the laser beams, interacting coherently
each time with the pump and probe ﬁelds. These atoms have
many wall collisions before eventually becoming depolar-
ized. The linewidth of the narrow peak is signiﬁcantly
affected by factors such as coating quality and cell geome-try.
5These effects tend to make the EIT data more difﬁcult
to interpret so that, in the work reported here, we do not use
coated cells.
In buffer gas cells, the usual practice for EIT and slow
light experiments is to mix noble gas (up to several tens of
Torr) with a few microTorr of Rb.5In our experiments, we
use 10 Torr of Ne. Frequent Rb–Ne collisions reduce the Rb
atoms’ mean free path to values much smaller than the pump
beam diameter,30thus conﬁning the atoms within the illumi-
nated volume. Instead of ﬂying through the laser beam at
thermal speeds, the atoms then slowly diffuse through,
thereby increasing the laser-atom interaction time by several
orders of magnitude.5Note that Rb–Ne collisions cause the
spin-polarized Rb atom’s velocity to change, but with negli-
gible spin relaxation. Such collisions that rapidly redistribute
the atomic velocities without re-equilibrating the populations
of the atomic levels are termed “velocity-changing
collisions” in the literature.27,30At the considered partial
pressures, Rb–Rb and Rb-wall collisions are negligible com-
pared to Rb-Ne collisions.Still, decoherence effects remain that are not addressed by
the buffer gas (or by wall coatings). Inhomogeneities in themagnetic ﬁeld used for Zeeman EIT cause spatial variationof the dark state leading to absorption. In Sec. S2 of the sup-plementary material,
11we discuss how to suppress these
inhomogeneities. Furthermore, an incoherent pumpingmechanism, known as radiation trapping, may become sig-
niﬁcant at high atomic densities. Radiation trapping refers to
the reabsorption of spontaneously emitted photons within theilluminated volume, and is expected to become signiﬁcantinside our probe beam radius at number densitiesN/C215/C210
11cm/C03(see Sec. IV D).31Hence, we keep our
number density below this value (see Secs. Vand S2 D).
C. Slow light conditions; estimate of c12,c13
Let us examine how the conditions for slow light, Eq. (5)
and Eq. (11), are satisﬁed in our experiments. The relation
between the Rabi frequency Xcand coupling beam intensity
I, in the case of the spin-polarized atom in Fig. 4(b),i s
deﬁned through the well-known expression for the saturation
intensity Isat,18,25,32
ð2jXcjÞ2
C2/C17I
2Isat;where Isat¼phc
3k3C: (16)
Here, kis the optical wavelength for the transition, and Cis
the natural linewidth due to spontaneous emission.25Isatis
the excitation intensity at which the stimulated emission rateis half the spontaneous emission rate. For the87Rb D1 transi-
tion,C¼2pð5:75 MHz) and k¼794:98 nm ( xp=2p¼3:77
/C21014Hz), yielding Isat¼1:5 mW/cm2.25Our pump inten-
sityImostly varies between 1.25 and 5.6 mW/cm2(see Sec.
IV D), which means jXcj=2pranges from 1.9 to 3.9 MHz.
The ground state decoherence rate c12arises from Rb–Rb
collisions, Rb collisions with the cell walls, and from Rbatoms eventually diffusing out of the illuminated volumedespite the buffer gas. Collisions with the inert buffer gas donot contribute signiﬁcantly to c
12. However, since our
experiments use Zeeman hyperﬁne levels, inhomogeneitiesin the magnetic ﬁeld contribute to c
12. Good suppression of
stray magnetic ﬁelds (Sec. S2, supplementary material)11
results in a value c12/C253 kHz, as reported in the litera-
ture.33,34Clearly, Xc/C29c12, and since Dp=2p/C24100 kHz or
less (see Figs. 2(e)and2(f)and8) our experiments fall in the
strong coupling intensity regime, i.e., the condition in Eq. (5)
is well-satisﬁed.
Next, to check that Eq. (11) is also well-satisﬁed in our
experiments, we note that the dipole matrix element jl13jfor
the87Rb D1 transition in our spin-polarized atom is well-
approximated by just the magnetic quantum number-independent value (known as the reduced matrix element)
2:54/C210
/C029cm.25The number density Nis/C241:5–3:4
/C21011cm/C03(see Sec. V), yielding ð1=2pÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Njl13j2xp=ð2/C150/C22hÞq
/C252–4 GHz, which exceeds the jXcj=2p-values by three orders
of magnitude.
Finally, we estimate the excited state damping c13which
arises from the spontaneous emission rate C, the dephasing
ccolldue to Rb collisions with the buffer gas, and the Doppler
broadening CD. Recall from Eq. (1)and Fig. 2(a)thatc13is
manifested as the half-width of the absorption peak.Our sample consists of a few lTorr of isotopically enriched
dilute87Rb vapor mixed with 10 Torr of Ne buffer gas.
198 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 198 04 October 2023 22:50:10
To estimate ccoll we follow the empirical relation
2ccoll=2p¼9:84 MHz/Torr derived in Ref. 35. We see that,
for 10 Torr of Ne, ccoll=2p/C2450 MHz. On the other hand, the
Doppler broadening of the absorption proﬁle of Rb vapor,illuminated by a frequency-scanning monochromatic beam,arises due to the thermal motion of the atoms.
36In a simple
1D situation, an atom moving with thermal velocity vth
toward or away from a laser beam of frequency x0sees a
Doppler-shifted frequency x0ð16vth=cÞ. This means that for
a thermal distribution of velocities we may estimate the full
width at half maximum (FWHM), CD, of the Doppler broad-
ened absorption proﬁle to be CD¼2x0vth=c¼2kvth.H e r e ,
k¼2p=kis the magnitude of the incident ﬁeld wave vector.
If we use the most probable velocity vth¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð2l n2ÞkBT=mp
,
we obtain vth/C25200 m/s at T¼293 K, yielding CD=2
/C252pð250 MHz) at k¼795 nm. Thus, c13is dominated by
ccollandCD=2 (both are signiﬁcantly larger than C). We use
their sum as an estimate for c13.
Note from Eqs. (9)and(13), that, in the high coupling
intensity limit, both vgandCEITdecrease linearly with the
intensity. However, lowering the intensity too far (althoughstill in the high intensity limit) may reduce the steady-state
population in the dark state enough that slow light effects
start to degrade, causing the probe pulse to distort and appearto speed up again. Thus, we may expect a sweet spot in thepump intensity, where conditions for slow light are opti-
mized (see Sec. VII C ).
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this section, we describe how we create pump, probe,
and reference beams, tuned to the appropriate alkali transi-
tions for Zeeman EIT shown in Fig. 4(b), and of the required
size, intensity, frequency, temporal width, and polarizationpurity. Our optical layout is depicted in Fig. 5.
A. Laser source
We use a commercial external cavity tunable diode laser
(ECDL) to provide linearly polarized continuous-wave light
at/C24795 nm. A few percent of the output is split off for use
in a saturated absorption spectroscopy (SAS) set-up to enablethe precise tuning of the laser to the F
g¼2!Fe¼1D 1
transition, as described below.The main ECDL output is ﬁrst passed through a Faraday
rotation-based optical isolator (OI) which optically isolates
the laser from back reﬂections (e.g., arising from the opticsthat couple the light into the ﬁber). The light then passes
through an anamorphic prism pair to circularize the elliptical
cross-section of the beam, before coupling into a single-
mode polarization-maintaining ﬁber which preserves the
direction of the linear polarization of the input beam (we
measured a residual drift of <2% in the polarization direc-
tion at the ﬁber output). The single-mode ﬁber is typically
aligned and operated at a transmission efﬁciency of only
30%–50%, but produces a clean Gaussian spatial proﬁle.
Gaussian spatial proﬁles are highly desirable for pump-probe
experiments where the pump and probe beams must be well-
collimated, and must have good spatial overlap that is ame-
nable to quantitative modeling.
B. Creating the pump and frequency-scannable probe
The output from the ﬁber ( /C247 mW) is collimated using an
aspheric lens. The collimated light is divided by a polarizingbeamsplitter (PBS 1) into two orthogonally linearly polar-
ized beams—the strong coupling (or pump) beam (solid line)
and weak probe beam (dashed line).
In pump-probe spectroscopy, the probe is swept in fre-
quency around the ﬁxed pump frequency, and the probe
transmission spectrum is detected. The sweeping is accom-
plished with an acousto-optic modulator (AOM), which is a
device that uses a sound wave propagating through a crystal
to form a diffraction grating for incoming light waves, pro-
ducing frequency-upshifted ( þ1) and downshifted (–1)
orders, in addition to the 0 order at the incident fre-
quency.
17,37The61 orders emanate at a slight angle to the
direction of the incident beam, symmetrically on either side,
while the 0 order continues along the incident beam direc-
tion. By carefully aligning the angle of incidence of the
beam on the AOM, we achieve about 70% of the incident
power in the ﬁrst order of choice, with most of the remaining
power in the 0 order, while a small amount leaks into the
undesired ﬁrst order. The AOM performs a frequency-scan
by introducing a ﬁxed offset (80 MHz in our case) and
sweeping back and forth about that ﬁxed offset value by
some desired amount (chosen by the user to be any value
from zero up to a maximum sweep 620 MHz for our AOM).
Fig. 5. Optical setup. The laser is split at a polarizing beamsplitter (PBS 1) into a strong pump, or coupling, beam (solid lines) and a weak probe beam (d ashed
lines). Before entering the vapor cell, the probe beam is split at a non-polarizing beamsplitter (NPBS 4) to create a reference beam (dotted lines) for the slow
light measurement. A Zeeman splitting magnetic ﬁeld is created within the vapor cell, along the indicated zaxis.
199 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 199 04 October 2023 22:50:10
For the purpose of measuring the EIT linewidth in Figs. 2(c)
and2(e), a sweep of 6100 kHz sufﬁces (see Fig. 8). Because
of the ﬁxed frequency-offset of 80 MHz that the AOM intro-duces, we must insert an identically conﬁgured AOM in thepath of the pump beam as well, so that both the pump andprobe beams are offset in frequency by the same amount. Todrive the AOMs, a dual-output waveform generator whichcreates twin phase-locked identical 80 MHz 1 V signals isused. Each signal is ampliﬁed using a standard RF ampliﬁerbefore being fed to the AOM. Planoconvex lenses of focallength 30 cm are placed on either side of each AOM, withthe AOM crystal located at the common focal spot.
One problem we encountered is that the angle of the dif-
fracted orders changes when the output frequency is varied,
causing a spatial shift in the beam at the vapor cell located a
few feet downstream. This shift is a problem because theprobe beam moves off the center of the vapor cell during thecourse of its frequency scan. To overcome this problem,the desired diffracted order is retroreﬂected back through thecrystal (see top right hand corner of Fig. 5), such that the
double-shifted order is aligned with the incident beam but inthe counter-propagating direction.
37For this double-shifted
beam the angular deﬂection from the second pass cancels thedeﬂection from the ﬁrst pass. The cancellation is not ideal, dueto unavoidable imperfections in alignment, but the spatial shift-ing of the scanning probe at the site of the vapor cell is highlysuppressed in this double-pass AOM conﬁguration. The pres-ence of the quarter waveplate just before the retroreﬂectingmirror in Fig. 5serves to orthogonally polarize the double-
shifted order with respect to the incident beam, enabling theseparation of the double-passed and incident beams at a polar-izing beamsplitter (PBS 2 for the pump, PBS 3 for the probe).
C. Frequency tuning pump and probe to EIT window
The frequency-tuning of the laser for implementing
Zeeman EIT is achieved in two steps. First, the laser is tunedto the 5
2S1=2;Fg¼2!52P1=2;andFe¼187Rb D1 transi-
tion, using the method of saturated absorption spectroscopy(SAS). Next, the pump and probe beams are ﬁne-tuned to them
Fg¼2;0 and mFe¼1 Zeeman sub-levels with the AOMs
(see Fig. 4(b)).
SAS is performed in a second vapor cell, that is not explic-
itly shown in Fig. 5. This cell is at room temperature, is ﬁlled
with natural abundance Rb vapor (72%85Rb, 28%87Rb), has
no buffer gas, and the walls are uncoated. Figure 6shows the
transmission spectrum of a weak beam diverted from the
ECDL into the SAS cell, where the D1 transitions for thetwo Rb isotopes are displayed in one continuous scan. In plot(a), the Doppler-broadened D1 transitions are shown, beforeSAS is performed. Only for the
87Rb D1 Festates do the
level separation of 815 MHz exceed the Doppler broadeningC
D=2pfor Rb vapor (see Sec. III C), enabling the two
excited states to be resolved. The85Rb D1 transitions, with
their smaller Feseparations, are totally smeared out by
Doppler broadening. However, when SAS is performed, byintroducing in the cell a strong beam that is spatially overlap-ping with the weak beam but counter-propagates, the absorp-tion is saturated for the velocity-class of atoms that travels ina direction perpendicular to both the strong and weak beams.The hyperﬁne transitions are revealed as narrow “holes” thatare “burnt” into the Doppler-broadened absorption spectra—these holes are manifested as “bumps” in the transmissionspectrum in Fig. 6(b). In plot (c), the Doppler component issubtracted away and the vertical scale is magniﬁed. The laser
is tuned to the F
g¼2!Fe¼187Rb D1 peak in plot (c) by
reducing the scan to zero, while staying centered on this par-ticular feature, and the goal of SAS is achieved. Note thatatoms that have a velocity component, say, along one of thelaser beams, may be down-shifted into resonance with thatbeam on a particular D1 transition, while being simulta-neously up-shifted into resonance with the counter-propagating beam on the higher adjacent D1 transition—thisresults in “crossover” peaks midway between adjacent D1transitions. See Ref. 38for further details on SAS.
Fig. 6. Tuning the ECDL to the 52S1=2;Fg¼2!52P1=2;Fe¼187Rb D1
transition via saturated absorption spectroscopy. (a) Transmission spectrumfor a weak beam propagating through a Rb vapor cell with uncoated walls
and no buffer gas (placed inside the box marked SAS in Fig. 5). The
Doppler broadened D1 transitions in
85Rb and87Rb are displayed in one
continuous scan. The Fe¼2 and 3 transitions in 85Rb are obscured, but the
Fe¼1 and 2 transitions in87Rb are resolved owing to their large separation
of 815 MHz. (b) A strong counter-propagating beam is introduced, revealing
the hyperﬁne structure, even more clearly in (c) by subtracting away theDoppler component and magnifying the vertical scale (Ref. 38).
200 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 200 04 October 2023 22:50:10
In order to obtain EIT transmission spectra, such as those
shown in Fig. 8, the frequencies of the pump and probe
beams need to be further ﬁne-tuned into resonance with theZeeman sub-levels m
Fg¼0!mFe¼1 and mFg¼2!mFe
¼1, respectively (see Fig. 4(b)). This ﬁne-tuning is achieved
inside the magnetically shielded vapor cell in Fig. 5
described in Secs. III B andIII C. The magnetic ﬁeld Bzfor
Zeeman splitting is created by a solenoid. Details on theRb–Ne vapor cell are provided in Sec. V. Details on the
magnetic shielding and solenoid are given in Sec. S2 ofthe supplementary material.
11Note that we must take into
account the Zeeman shifts of 0.7 kHz/mG between the mag-netic sub-levels of the F
g¼2 ground state.25In our experi-
ments, Bz¼50 mG, yielding a Zeeman splitting between
adjacent ground sub-states of 35 kHz. B ecause the SAS pro-
cedure tunes the ECDL frequency before the laser is splitinto pump and probe, this means that if the pump happensto be in resonance with the m
Fg¼0!mFe¼1 transition,
the probe (which is at the same frequency) is detuned fromthem
Fg¼2!mFe¼1 probe transition by Dp¼70 kHz
(position A in Fig. 7). Scanning the probe AOM frequency
(A$C) symmetrically about position B in Fig. 7,w h e r e
the probe detuning Dp¼0 (or more precisely, where the
two-photon detuning is zero; see Sec. II D), yields EIT reso-
nance spectra as displayed in Fig. 8. For the slow light
experiments, the scan is reduced to zero while staying cen-tered at B.
It is worth noting that, before the strong (co-propagating)
pump is turned on, the weak probe experiences an absorp-tion proﬁle in the Rb–Ne vapor cell that resembles Fig.6(a). In Sec. III C we estimated the linewidth c
13,a r i s i n g
from Doppler and collisional broadening in the Rb–Ne cell,for the D1 transitions to be comparable to those shown inFig.6(a). Turning on the strong co-propagating pump acti-
vates the narrow EIT window predicted by Fig. 2(b),a n d
observed in Fig. 8. It is clear from Fig. 6(a) that even
though the F
g¼2!Fe¼187Rb D1 transition is advanta-
geous for slow light experiments because this particulartransition has the least spectral overlap with neighboringD1 transitions, some residual overlap of the F
e¼1;2 levels
is visible. This suggests it is likely there is leakage of atomsfrom the F
e¼1t ot h e Fe¼2 level in the Rb–Ne vapor cell,
resulting in a diminished dark state population and areduced EIT contrast.D. Pump and probe beam size and pump intensity
The probe beam is Gaussian with a 1 =e
2-radius of
1.13 mm (the distance from the center of the beam where theintensity drops to 1 =e
2of its value at the center). To approxi-
mate an ideal plane wave (see Sec. 1 in supplementary mate-
rial Notes), the pump beam, which is also Gaussian, isexpanded to a 1 =e
2-radius of 2.26 mm using a telescope
comprising two simple plano–convex lenses mounted in a
cage assembly (see Fig. 5). The pump intensity was mostly
varied between 1.25 and 5.6 mW/cm2.
E. Probe and reference pulses and probe intensity
In our experiments, the probe beam is in the form of a
short (temporal) Gaussian pulse. Slow light demonstrations
consist of measurements of the delay of the probe pulsepropagating through the sample, relative to an identical ref-
erence pulse propagating along a similar path-length outside
the sample. This reference pulse, depicted by the dotted linesin Fig. 5, is split off from the probe pulse by inserting a non-
polarizing beamsplitter NPBS 4 into the probe path, as
shown. The probe and reference pulses are created by ampli-tude modulation of the probe AOM: The probe RF ampliﬁer
output is pulsed on and off by pulsing the input from its
waveform generator. It is then straight-forward to measuretime-delays between the centers of temporal Gaussian
pulses. The pulse repetition rate is chosen so that the spacing
between consecutive probe pulses far exceeds the achievabletime-delay between a probe—reference pulse pair. These
delays are typically tens of ls (see Sec. VII). Thus, we set
the time period for the amplitude modulation of the probeAOM at a few ms (3.4 ms in our case).
Matching the reference pulse path-length to the probe path
is a loose requirement because light takes only about a nano-
second to travel 30 cm in air—which is negligible comparedto the delay induced by the slowing down of the light in our
experiment. The reference and probe pulses are made inci-
dent on the same photodetector, and the delay in their arrivaltimes is measured on an oscilloscope by blocking one pulse
(with a card) while detecting the other.
From Sec. II F, the durations of the Gaussian probe and
reference pulses must be long enough that the pulsefrequency-bandwidth (estimated as the inverse of the 1 =e-
pulse-duration s
p) ﬁts inside the EIT spectral window CEIT.
According to Eq. (9)the EIT linewidth broadens linearly
with pump intensity, necessitating probe pulses of progres-sively longer duration as the pump intensity decreases. For
convenience, we keep the probe pulse duration constant, and
long enough so that the frequency bandwidth ﬁts inside theEIT linewidth for the full range of pump intensities (see
Secs. VIandVII B ).
The probe intensity must be kept signiﬁcantly less than
the pump, in order to satisfy the weak probe assumption.However, the probe pulse is too short to register on a typical
power meter. Therefore, we illuminated a fast photodiode
with continuous-wave light of known intensity, and cali-brated the response in volts (as measured on an oscilloscope)
per mW. Next, the probe pulse was shone upon the diode
and the shape of the voltage response recorded. In our casethe pulses have a 1 =e-width of 170 ls, and the peak of the
probe Gaussian temporal waveform is set at 0.3 mW/cm
2
(the average intensity of the probe pulse is 0.12 mW/cm2).
Fig. 7. Fine-tuning the pump and probe laser frequencies to the mFg¼0!
mFe¼1 and mFg¼2!mFe¼1 sub-levels, respectively. Tuning the
ECDL via SAS may put the pump in resonance with the pump transition but
leaves the probe, which is at the same frequency, detuned from the probe
transition by Dp¼70 kHz (position A). EIT resonance is achieved by ﬁne-
tuning the probe frequency with the probe AOM so that Dpis reduced to
zero (position B). Scanning the probe frequency symmetrically about B gen-
erates the EIT spectra, such as those shown in Fig. 8.
201 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 201 04 October 2023 22:50:10
F. Leakage of pump beam into the detected probe mode
The pump and probe beams are recombined at polarizing
beamsplitter PBS 5, so that the pump is reﬂected while the
probe is transmitted toward the Rb–Ne vapor cell. A half-
wave plate, placed in each beam before PBS 5, adjusts the
relative intensity of the pump and probe beams. Because ofthe large pump beam size, the corresponding half-wave plate
(10 mm diameter) is located before the beam expander. PBS
5 has the property that 99.5% of s-polarization (light polari-
zation normal to plane of incidence) is reﬂected whereas
only 90% of p-polarized light (light polarization parallel to
plane of incidence) is transmitted. In our setup, sis vertical
polarization (perpendicular to the optics table surface) and p
is horizontal (parallel to the table surface). For this reason,
the pump beam, which must be strong, is chosen to be s-
polarized, and the probe is p-polarized.
The combined beams, which are orthogonal-linearly-
polarized, are passed through a quarter-wave plate (QP 1 in
Fig. 5) and converted to orthogonal-circularly-polarized
before entering the vapor cell, as is required for the Zeeman
EITK-scheme. Irises are inserted to assist in day-to-day
alignments. A second quarter-wave plate (QP 2) placed afterthe vapor cell converts the r
þandr/C0polarizations back to
linear polarization so that the pump can be separated from
the probe at a polarizing beamsplitter (PBS 6). A half-wave
plate placed just after QP 2 is adjusted so that the probe
transmits through PBS 6 and is focused onto a photodiode,while the pump is reﬂected away. The probe transmission
spectrum is recorded via a fast photodiode connected to a
digital oscilloscope. The impedance of the detector is kept
low (10 k X) in order to reduce electrical reﬂections in the
BNC cable between the detector and oscilloscope, at the costof reduced overall voltage signal.
It is obviously important to suppress as much as possible
leakage of the strong pump beam into the detector at polariz-
ing beamsplitter PBS 6. Polarizing beamsplitter cubes typi-
cally provide an extinction of 10
3:1. For the highest pump
powers used in our experiment, we found that a 0.1% pumpleakage at PBS 6 more than doubles the power in the
detected probe mode. Further, pump leakage may distort the
shape of the probe pulse because the pump-proﬁle is not
entirely ﬂat. A cleaner probe signal is obtained by the use of
a Glan–Thompson polarizer (extinction ratio 105:1) as PBS 6
for pump-probe separation. Despite careful attempts to mini-
mize the pump light from leaking into the probe detector, we
observed some residual pump leakage. We suspect this is
due to the use of low-order wave plates (as opposed to more
expensive zero-order wave plates) and to residual errors inthe alignment of QP1 and QP2’s optical axes.
V. MAGNETICALLY SHIELDED WARM VAPOR
CELL
For our slow light experiments, we use a pyrex glass vapor
cell, that is a sealed cylinder of 25 mm diameter, containinga small amount of isotopically pure solid
87Rb metal, along
with 10 Torr of Ne buffer gas. Heating the cell is a conve-
nient way to controllably vary the Rb atomic concentration
in the vapor phase, yielding a few lTorr of87Rb vapor. A
heater assembly is used to vary the cell temperature from 55to 65
/C14C during the experiment, thus varying the Rb atomic
number density Nparticipating in EIT between 1 :5/C21011
and 3 :4/C21011cm/C03(see the supplementary material, Sec.S2).11The length of the cell (28 mm) includes 1.6 mm win-
dows (not anti-reﬂection coated) on either end. Therefore,the length of the vapor sample Lis taken to be 25 mm. The
cell is placed inside a solenoid as shown in Fig. 5. To enable
Zeeman EIT, the solenoid applies a small magnetic ﬁeldB
z¼50 mG, co-linear with the laser beam propagation. The
cell, solenoid, and heater assembly are placed inside a mag-netic shield in order to reduce stray magnetic ﬁelds incident
on the sample below 0.2 mG, i.e., <0.5% of B
z(see the sup-
plementary material, Sec. S2).11
VI. SETTING THE PROBE PULSE BANDWIDTH
In order to observe slow light, we need to ensure that the
probe (and reference) pulse bandwidth is less than the EIT
spectral window CEIT. The EIT spectrum is obtained by the
procedure described in Sec. IV C.
Figure 8shows EIT lineshapes (and in the inset, EIT line-
widths) obtained by measuring the probe transmitted poweras a function of the probe detuning D
pfor pump intensities
ranging from 1.3 to 5.5 mW/cm2, which correspond to
Xc=2p-values of 1.9 and 3.9 MHz, respectively (see Sec.
III C). The maximum contrast measured (for the highest
intensity of 5.5 mW/cm2) is only /C2425%, for reasons
explained in Secs. II DandIII B; the contrast decreases as
the pump intensity is lowered. In order to enable a visual
linewidth comparison between the lineshapes obtained at dif-
ferent pump intensities, we normalized the lineshapes anddisplayed them on the same vertical scale, as is shown for (a)the highest and (b) the lowest intensities. We ﬁt each line-shape to a Lorentzian (thin black curves), for which the
FWHM yields the value for C
EIT=2p. In the inset, the data-
points represent EIT linewidths extracted from these ﬁts forﬁve different pump intensities, and the line represents theprediction for C
EIT=2pfrom Eq. (9). We note that a close
look at the zero probe detuning point in the main ﬁgurereveals that the data are spectrally narrower at the center of
the Lorentzian owing to coherent contributions from atoms
that diffuse in and out of the laser beam multiple times with-out decohering (this is known as Ramsey-narrowing).
5,33
Fig. 8. Typical EIT lineshapes (probe transmitted power versus probe detun-
ing) measured in a few lTorr of isotopically pure87Rb vapor with 10 Torr
Ne at 65/C14C, for pump intensities of (a) I¼5.5 mW/cm2(Xc=2p¼3:9 MHz)
and (b) 1.3 mW/cm2(Xc=2p¼1:9 MHz). The ﬁgure shows normalized EIT
lineshapes, measured for the highest (blue line) and lowest (orange line)
pump intensities, to allow a visual comparison of the linewidths. The
Lorentzian ﬁts (thin black curves) are included. The inset shows good agree-
ment between the observed EIT linewidths (data points), and CEIT/2ppre-
dicted by Eq. (9)(line), for ﬁve different pump intensities.
202 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 202 04 October 2023 22:50:10
We chose a 1 =e-width of 170 ls for our Gaussian probe
and reference pulses (see Sec. IV E). The corresponding
bandwidth of /C201 kHz ﬁts inside the EIT window, which,
from Eq. (9), is at least 2 c12=2p/C256 kHz wide even for the
smallest pump intensities.
Generating a EIT lineshape measurement as in Fig. 8typi-
cally takes 40 ms for the higher pump intensities, and 160 ms
for the lower intensities (we set the AOM for a 6100 kHz
frequency-sweep in 10 ms; each spectrum in Fig. 8is an
average of either 4 or 16 such sweeps). Our laser system’s
passive stabilization yields a frequency drift of <10 MHz/h,
resulting in a drift of less than 0.5 kHz while generating these
EIT data-proﬁles.
VII. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In order to create short pulses, the probe frequency scan is
now turned off, the probe AOM offset voltage is tuned to theEIT peak, and the amplitude modulation is turned on, as
described in Sec. IV E. Once both slow and reference pulses
are detected on an oscilloscope, the temporal waveform foreach is ﬁt to a Gaussian curve, and the relative delay time s
d
is extracted. Typical measurements of sdare presented inFig. 9, where the data (fuzzy lines) are shown along with
Gaussian ﬁts (smooth lines).
In Figs. 9(a) and9(b), the reference pulse arrives at the
detector earlier than the probe by sd¼41 and 68 ls, respec-
tively, which corresponds to a slowed probe group velocityv
gof 610 and 368 m/s (using vg¼L=sdÞ. In each case, the
peaks of the ﬁts for reference and probe are scaled to the
same value for easier comparison. The reference and probepulse intensities are similar at the non-polarizing beamsplit-ter (NPBS4, Fig. 5), but the probe pulse suffers some absorp-
tion in the vapor (recall that our EIT contrast never exceeds25%), which explains the increased noise on the slowedpulses. The slower group velocity was achieved by loweringthe pump intensity which further reduces the overall signal-to-noise ratio.
A. Observed C
EIT,sd, and vgversus theoretical prediction
To predict the EIT linewidth CEIT, we insert in Eq. (9)
parameter values that are relevant to our experiment, as dis-cussed in Sec. III C:c
12=2p/C253 kHz, c13=2p/C25300 MHz.
The optical depth is estimated using N¼3:4/C21011cm/C03
andL¼2.5 cm (see Sec. V), yielding OD/C2525. The inset in
Fig.8shows that the datapoints for CEIT=2pare in reason-
able agreement with the prediction (line) from Eq. (9), with-
out the use of any ﬁtting parameters.
To predict the delay time sdand the slowed probe group
velocity vg, we refer to Eqs. (13)and(14), which use just the
power-broadened component of CEIT. For intensities I¼3
and 1.2 mW/cm2as in Fig. 9, the calculated delays sdare 72
ls (yielding a predicted vgof 347 m/s) and 181 ls (predicted
vg¼138 m/s), respectively. The predicted vg-values are a
factor two to three slower than the observed vg-values in
Figs. 9(a)and9(b). To make more accurate predictions, we
must move away from an idealized three-level atom modeland include the full hyperﬁne structure (Fig. 3), which is
beyond the scope of this article.19
B. Role of EIT transparency window
Figure 9(a)highlights the importance of the EIT process.
The squat data-waveform is the transmitted probe pulsewhen the pump beam is blocked causing the EIT window tocease to exist: Large absorption and no slowing is observed.The transmitted power of the slow pulse for the unblockedpump is /C2420%–25% of the incident probe power, while for
the blocked pump is less than 5%.
To further highlight the important role played by EIT, we
show in Fig. 9(c)what happens if we select a pulse duration
for which the probe bandwidth does not ﬁt inside the EIT
transparency window. The input Gaussian pulse in this case,/C2420ls (which yields a 1 =e-pulse bandwidth of /C2410 kHz), is
nearly an order of magnitude shorter than the 170 ls pulse
employed in Figs. 9(a) and9(b). Thus, in the case of Fig.
9(c)the pulse bandwidth is comparable to the EIT window
which ranges from a few kHz to /C2030 kHz for our experi-
ments. The frequency components of this pulse that do notﬁt within the EIT window are not slowed and are instead sig-niﬁcantly absorbed. This leads to signiﬁcant temporal
stretching and distortion of the pulse (we scaled the vertical
size of the reference pulse to resemble the transmittedprobe).
In fact, some probe pulse broadening is visible even in the
case of the slowest group velocity measured in Fig. 9(b).I n
Fig. 9. Measurement of time-delay sdbetween reference and probe pulses
traveling through air and the EIT medium, respectively. (a) sd¼41ls
yields vg¼610 m/s. Pump intensity I¼3 mW/cm2. The squat data-curve is
the transmitted probe pulse when the pump is blocked, in which case
EIT ceases so that large absorption occurs with no slowing. (b) sd¼68ls
yields vg¼368 m/s, our slowest observed velocity. Pump intensity
I¼1.2 mW/cm2. (c) Signiﬁcant distortion in the transmitted probe pulse
occurs if we select a pulse duration so narrow that the probe bandwidth does
not ﬁt inside the EIT transparency window. All measurements are in87Rb
vapor with 10 Torr Ne at 65/C14C.
203 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 203 04 October 2023 22:50:10
this case, higher frequency components of the 170 ls
Gaussian probe pulse (1 =e-frequency bandwidth /C241 kHz)
extrude past the 10.8 kHz Lorentzian EIT transparency win-
dow, and are strongly absorbed. This causes an effective nar-rowing of the probe bandwidth, which leads to a broadening
of the pulse duration.
C. Slow group velocity versus pump intensity
In Fig. 10, we plot the experimentally observed slow light
group velocity for several pump intensities at three different
vapor temperatures. The observed temperature dependenceofv
gis in accordance with what we expect from Eq. (13):N
increases with T(see Sec. S2 D in supplementary material11)
causing vgto decrease.
At a ﬁxed temperature, we surmise from Fig. 10that two
competing slow light effects occur when we vary the pump
intensity. The linear increase in vgwith increasing pump
intensity Iis expected from Eq. (13). Recall that this origi-
nates from the power-broadening of the EIT transparency
window as described by Eq. (9), thereby reducing the
“tightness of the pinch” of the “wrinkle” in the real refractiveindex n
ratDp¼0 in Figs. 2(d)and2(f).
However, it is obvious that one cannot keep reducing the
pump intensity to achieve lower and lower group velocities
as there is no slow light in the absence of a pump.
At really low pump intensities, the weak probe assumption
starts to break down and, as mentioned in Sec. III C already,
the population of atoms being pumped to the dark state may
decline to the point that the probe pulse appears to startspeeding up again.
Group velocities of several thousand m/s sufﬁce for most
cutting-edge experiments on quantum memory and image
storage in warm vapor.
5,6At higher temperatures, the density
increases, but so do spin depolarization mechanisms such as
Rb–Rb spin exchange collisions and radiation trapping, as
indicated in Sec. III B. In vapor cells that use parafﬁn-based
anti-spin relaxation coatings instead of buffer gas, tempera-
tures exceeding 80/C14C may cause coating breakdown.
Coatings, such as OTS (octadecyltrichlorosilane), permithigher temperatures.
39,40
VIII. CONCLUSION
We have presented detailed theoretical and experimental
undergraduate-friendly instructions on how to produce light
pulses propagating through warm alkali vapor with speeds aslow as few hundred m/s, emphasizing the role played by EIT
in the production of slow light.
The experimental setup described here is remarkably ver-
satile. It can be used for investigations into slow and storedlight, including detailed measurements of the pulse delay s
d
as the pulse width spis varied, and further measurement of
the subtle Ramsey narrowing seen at the EIT line-center inFig.8as the pump and probe beam sizes are varied.33By
slightly varying the angle between the pump and probebeams, one can study EIT linewidth-narrowing due to thespatial localization of alkali atoms from frequent velocity-changing collisions with the buffer gas.
41Furthermore, one
may study how atomic diffusion degrades storage times forslow light pulses42of various transverse proﬁles, e.g.,
Laguerre–Gaussian43and Bessel beams,44which possess
topological phase features that permit signiﬁcantly morerobust storage in comparison to the usual Gaussian beams.The setup may be adapted for innovative magnetometry withpotential applications in magnetic induction tomography andthe detection of concealed objects.
45,46
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support by the U.
S. Army Research Laboratory and the U. S. Army ResearchOfﬁce under Grant No. W911NF2110120. The authorsappreciate insightful discussions with Drs. Irina Novikova,David Phillips, Ofer Firstenberg, and Ran Finkelstein, andinvaluable detailed feedback from the three anonymousreferees and from the editor. The authors thank Hong Cai,Kaleb Campbell, Richard Jackson, Dillon deMedeiros,Bradley Worth, Amanda Day, Somaya Madkhaly, Yuhong(Iris) Zhang, Peter Harnish, and Jason Barkeloo for helpduring the initial setup. The authors thank the Miami
University Instrumentation Laboratory for crucial help in
machining and electronics.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
Author Contributions
Kenneth DeRose and Kefeng Jiang contributed equally to
this work.
a)ORCID: 0000-0003-2354-3617.
b)Electronic mail: balis@miamioh.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-8677-305X.
1L. V. Hau, S. E. Harris, Z. Dutton, and C. H. Behroozi, “Light speed
reduction to 17 metres per second in an ultracold atomic gas,” Nature 397,
594–598 (1999).
2M. Kash, V. Sautenkov, A. Zibrov, L. Hollberg, G. Welch, M. Lukin, Y.
Rostovtsev, E. Fry, and M. Scully, “Ultraslow group velocity and
enhanced nonlinear optical effects in a coherently driven hot atomic gas,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 5229–5232 (1999).
3S. Harris, J. Field, and A. Imamoglu, “Nonlinear optical processes using
electromagnetically induced transparency,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 64,
1107–1110 (1990).
4S. Harris, “Electromagnetically induced transparency,” Phys. Today 50(7),
36–42 (1997).
5I. Novikova, R. Walsworth, and Y. Xiao, “Electromagnetically inducedtransparency-based slow and stored light in warm atoms,” Laser Photonics
Rev. 6, 333–353 (2012).
6L. Ma, O. Slattery, and X. Tang,“Optical quantum memory based on
electromagnetically induced transparency”, J. Opt. 19, 043001
(2017).
Fig. 10. Slow light at different pump intensities Iand temperatures T(lines
drawn to guide the eye). All measurements are in isotopically pure87Rb
vapor with 10 Torr Ne.
204 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 204 04 October 2023 22:50:10
7M. Afzelius, N. Gisin, and H. D. Riedmatten, “Quantum memory for pho-
tons,” Phys. Today 68(12), 42–47 (2015).
8C. Adams, J. Pritchard, and J. Schaffer, “Rydberg atom quantum tech-
nologies,” J. Phys. B 53(1), 012002 (2020).
9N. Belcher, E. Mikhailov, and I. Novikova, “Atomic clocks and coherent
population trapping: Experiments for undergraduate labs,” Am. J. Phys.
77, 988–998 (2009).
10See, for example, A. Zheng, A. Green, M. Crescimanno, and S. O’Leary,
“Electromagnetically-induced-transparency intensity-correlation powerbroadening in a buffer gas,” Phys. Rev. A 93, 043825 (2016).
11See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0128967 for background details on the basic physics behind
EIT, in addition to useful technical details on magnetic shielding and heat-
ing of the alkali vapor cell, and the construction of a solenoid to apply asmall magnetic ﬁeld to the vapor cell.
12A. J. Olson and S. K. Mayer, “Electromagnetically induced transparencyin rubidium,” Am. J. Phys. 77(2), 116–121 (2009).
13T. Pang, “Electromagnetically induced transparency,” Am. J. Phys. 69(5),
604–606 (2001).
14K. McDonald, “Slow light,” Am. J. Phys. 68(3), 293–294 (2000).
15M. Fleischhauer and G. Juzeli /C22unas, “Slow, stored, and stationary light,” in
Optics in Our Time , edited by M. Al-Amri, M. El-Gomati, and M. Zubairy
(Springer, New York, 2016), pp. 359–385.
16P. W. Milonni and J. H. Eberly, Laser Physics (Wiley, New York, 2010).
17B. E. A. Saleh and M. Teich, Fundamentals of Photonics , 3rd ed. (Wiley,
New York, 2019); provides the Kramer–Kronig relations for the real andimaginary parts of the electric susceptibility v
0andv00, respectively, where
v0¼2ðnr/C01Þandv00¼ca=xp.
18Our deﬁnition of Xc;Xpfollows. Refs. 5,16, and 19. Some authors omit
the 2 in the denominator (e.g., Refs. 25and27).
19M. Lukin, M. Fleischhauer, A. Zibrov, H. Robinson, V. Velichansky, L.
Hollberg, and M. Scully, “Spectroscopy in dense coherent media: Line nar-
rowing and interference effects,” P h y s .R e v .L e t t . 79, 2959–2962 (1997).
20M. Fleischhauer and M. Lukin, “Quantum memory for photons: Dark-state
polaritons,” Phys. Rev. A 65(2), 022314 (2002).
21Equation (14)is identical to Eq. (6) in Ref. 5, Eq. (38) in Ref. 20.
22M. Klein, M. Hohensee, Y. Xiao, R. Kalra, D. Phillips, and R. Walsworth,
“Slow-light dynamics from electromagnetically induced transparencyspectra,” Phys. Rev. A 79(5), 053833 (2009).
23Equation (15) is identical to Eq. (39) in Ref. 20.
24N. B. Phillips, A. V. Gorshkov, and I. Novikova, “Optimal light storage in
atomic vapor,” Phys. Rev. A 78(2), 023801 (2008).
25D. Steck, see https://steck.us/alkalidata/ for reference data on the D spec-
tral lines for Rb.
26See Fig. 7.5 on p. 141 of Ref. 27.
27M. Auzinsh, D. Budker, and S. M. Rochester, Optically Polarized Atoms
(Oxford U.P., New York, 2010).
28W. Happer, “Optical pumping,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 44(2), 169–249 (1972).29J. E. Thomas and W. W. Quivers, Jr., “Transit-time effects in optically
pumped coupled three-level systems,” Phys. Rev. A 22(5), 2115–2121
(1980).
30E. Arimondo, “Relaxation processes in coherent population trapping,”
Phys. Rev. A 54(3), 2216–2223 (1996).
31A. Matsko, I. Novikova, M. Scully, and G. Welch, “Radiation trapping in
coherent media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87(13), 133601 (2001).
32See Ref. 16, Sec. 4.11 or Ref. 27, Sec. 9.1.
33Y. Xiao, I. Novikova, D. F. Phillips, and R. Walsworth, “Diffusion-
induced Ramsey narrowing,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 043601 (2006).
34M. Shuker, O. Firstenberg, Y. Sagi, A. Ben-kish, N. Davidson, and A.
Ron, “Ramsey-like measurement of the decoherence rate between Zeeman
sublevels,” Phys. Rev. A 78, 063818 (2008).
35M. D. Rotondaro and G. P. Perram, “Collisional broadening and shift of
the rubidium D1 and D2 lines (52S1=2!52P1=2;52P3=2) by rare gases, H 2,
D2,N2,C H 4and CF 4,”J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiat. Transfer 57, 497–507
(1997).
36See, for example. Ref. 16, Sec. 3.9, pp 105–108.
37J. Kleykamp, A. Hachtel, D. Kane, M. Marshall, N. Souther, P. Harnish,
and S. Bali, “Measurement of sub-natural line width AC Stark shifts in
cold atoms: An experiment for an advanced undergraduate laboratory,”
Am. J. Phys. 79(12), 1211–1217 (2011); see Fig. 5 and accompanying text
in.
38A. Hachtel, J. Kleykamp, D. Kane, M. Marshall, B. Worth, J. Barkeloo, J.Kangara, J. Camenisch, M. Gillette, and S. Bali, “An undergraduate mea-surement of radiative broadening in atomic vapor,” Am. J. Phys. 80(8),
740–743 (2012); 81(6),471(2013).
39See, private communication; see also “Technical Info” on the Precision
Glassblowing, Inc. website.
40H. Chi, W. Quan, J. Zhang, L. Zhao, and J. Fang, “Advances in anti-relaxation coatings of alkali-metal vapor cells,” Appl. Surf. Sci. 501,
143897 (2020).
41M. Shuker, O. Firstenberg, R. Pugatch, A. Ben-Kish, A. Ron, and N.
Davidson, “Angular dependence of Dicke-narrowed electromagnetically
induced transparency resonances,” Phys. Rev. A 76(2), 023813 (2007).
42M. Shuker, O. Firstenberg, R. Pugatch, A. Ron, and N. Davidson, “Storing
images in warm atomic vapor,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 223601 (2008).
43R. Pugatch, M. Shuker, O. Firstenberg, A. Ron, and N. Davidson,
“Topological stability of stored optical vortices,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 98,
203601 (2007).
44S. Smartsev, R. Chriki, D. Eger, O. Firstenberg, and N. Davidson,“Structured beams invariant to coherent diffusion,” Opt. Express 28(22),
33708–33717 (2020).
45A. Wickenbrock, F. Tricot, and F. Renzoni, “Magnetic induction measure-ments using an all-optical
87Rb atomic magnetometer,” Appl. Phys. Lett.
103, 243503 (2013).
46C. Deans, L. Marmugi, and F. Renzoni, “Through-barrier electromagnetic
imaging with an atomic magnetometer,” Opt. Express 25(15),
17911–17917 (2017).
205 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 3, March 2023 DeRose et al. 205 04 October 2023 22:50:10
