
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| MAY 01 2022
Quantitative analysis of a smartphone pendulum beyond
linear approximation: A lockdown practical homework 
R. Mathevet ; N. Lamrani ; L. Martin ; P. Ferrand ; J. P. Castro ; P. Marchou ; C. M. Fabre
Am. J. Phys.  90, 344–350 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0010073
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Changes in the soundscape of Girona during the COVID lockdown
J. Acoust. Soc. Am.  (May 2021)
Effect of Covid-19 lockdown on mobility and traf fic accidents in Malaysia
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2023)
Lifestyle modification during Covid-19 lockdown and health related quality of life post Covid 19 lockdown
among the geriatric patients in Chennai
AIP Conf. Proc.  (September 2023) 04 October 2023 23:08:13
Quantitative analysis of a smartphone pendulum beyond linear
approximation: A lockdown practical homework
R.Matheveta)
LNCMI-EMFL, CNRS UPR3228, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, F-38058 Grenoble, France; Univ. Toulouse, Univ.
Toulouse 3, INSA-T, F-31077 Toulouse, France; and IRES, Universit /C19e Toulouse III, F-31062 Toulouse, France
N.Lamrani, L.Martin, P.Ferrand, J. P . Castro, P.Marchou, and C. M. Fabre
IRES, Universit /C19e Toulouse III, F-31062 Toulouse, France
(Received 6 May 2021; accepted 18 March 2022)
We present a detailed analysis of a smartphone pendulum, part of which was given as a homework
assignment to ﬁrst-year undergraduate students. We took care in the design and construction of the
pendulum itself to draw maximum beneﬁt from the high quality of the embedded sensors. Our
students build a pendulum and analyze their data using the damped harmonic oscillator model. Weintroduce them to residue analysis to make them aware of slight nonlinearities in both the restoring
and damping forces. Beyond what we ask our students, we present here results of numerical
analyses to quantify these nonlinearities and demonstrate that aerodynamic drag contributes quitesigniﬁcantly to damping. We ﬁnally discuss our pedagogical experience using this assignment in
the classroom.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0010073
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, almost every student possesses a smartphone
that is equipped with sensors for purposes such as localiza-
tion, orientation, gaming, and photography. Apps that pro-
vide direct access to the sensor data have been put to use for
practical teaching exercises for high school and university
students.
Oscillatory motion is a keystone of physics, and many
papers have been published that use smartphones to revisit
classical experiments1or propose innovative pedagogical
practices.2,3Different conﬁgurations of simple pendulums4–6
or compound pendulums7have been investigated. Other
studies involve horizontal oscillating masses8,9and, possibly,
coupled systems.8,10Motion is commonly monitored using
the smartphone’s accelerometers,7,11but other sensors such
as magnetic ﬁelds,12,13light intensity,9,14and rotation15may
be used. Furthermore, some apps allow for combined rota-
tion and acceleration recording, which gives interesting
investigations.15Finally, other open platforms, such as
Arduino7or video recording,16have also been used. An
exhaustive resource letter on mobile devices and sensors for
physics teaching recently appeared in this journal.17
Many protocols found in the literature and, in particular,
videos on the web are more demonstrative than quantitative.
As a common example, the smartphone is simply suspendedby hand using its own power supply cord. The experiment is
then quite simple but suffers from movement of the attach-
ment point and stiffness in the power cord. An agreement
between the theory and measurement within a few percent is
often considered as a good achievement. However, the
embedded sensors are of high quality and so allow, as we
shall see, for a more detailed analysis that reveals a much
richer physical content.8,15,18–20
We present below the project we have assigned to a ﬁrst
year undergraduate class, which has been developed over
two years. Students build their own pendulum (following
provided instructions) and analyzed their data using increas-ingly reﬁned numerical techniques provided in the form of a
Python program. Our purpose is to introduce our students tothe scientiﬁc approach and, in particular, to the necessity of
repeated cycles of experimentation and modeling to develop
a complete scientiﬁc understanding of real systems.
This paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II, we present
our setup, its particular dynamics, and the experiments we
carried out to show how simple and compound pendulums
differ. Then in Sec. III, we perform a conventional curve ﬁt-
ting using the damped harmonic oscillator model. Despite a
seemingly good agreement, residue analysis shows a signiﬁ-
cant discrepancy between the damped sine wave and actual
data. We thus introduce in Sec. IV, less common data analy-
sis methods that exhibit the nature of nonlinearities both inthe amplitude and in the instantaneous frequency of the pen-
dulum. In Sec. V, we discuss how the project is actually
given to our students and some of the related pedagogical
aspects.
II. SETUP AND DYNAMICS
A. Setup
In order to restrict the motion to a vertical plane and mini-
mize spurious oscillations, the smartphone is placed in anenvelope suspended by two parallel threads
4–6(Fig. 1). We
took care in this apparatus design to enable a precise quanti-
tative comparison later on. A thin and almost inelastic sew-
ing thread runs from AtoDthrough the holes BandCmade
in the envelope. The thread is adjusted until ADandBCare
parallel and then secured using adhesive tape at points Band
C. A wooden stick is inserted between BandCto stiffen the
top of the envelope (Fig. 2(a)). At points AandD, the thread
is wrapped around a ruler to precisely set AD¼BC¼19:0
cm. The ruler is then clamped to a beam with ADandBC
parallel to the ground. This achieves an almost perfect paral-
lelogram ABCD with side length L/C242 m with well-deﬁned
suspension points.
B. Kinematics and dynamics
The system is analyzed in the laboratory frame with ﬁxed
xand yaxes being, respectively, vertical and horizontal.
344 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 344 04 October 2023 23:08:13
The smartphone oscillates in the xy-plane. Its motion is per-
pendicular to its thinnest dimension, which reduces aerody-namic friction.
Our pendulum differs from more common setups, in
which the smartphone is held by its power supply cord,which behave as compound pendulums. The velocity of thecenter of mass is perpendicular to the supporting thread andparallel to the rotating y-axis of the smartphone. Since the
smartphone size and weight are not negligible, rotation ofthe smartphone around its center of mass must also be con-sidered. This makes quantitative comparisons difﬁcult.
In contrast, our design is a deformable parallelogram with
quite a different kinematics. During the motion, BCremains par-
allel to the ground by construction. The system is, thus, in a cir-cular motion but does not rotate about its own center of mass.
The motion of all of the points of the system describes circles of
the same radius but with different centers (Fig. 1). At any time,
all the points have the same velocity and acceleration as the cen-t e ro fm a s s G. The actual position of the sensor inside the smart-
phone makes no difference. We will see that the systemdynamics reduces to those of a simple pendulum.
The system dynamics is easily obtained from an energetic
analysis. We consider the system of total mass mmade up ofthe envelope and the smartphone, but we neglect the contri-
bution of the threads. The forces to be considered are: theweight W¼mgand friction force F, both applied to the cen-
ter of mass G, and the threads’ tension T
BandTCapplied at
the suspending points (Fig. 1). We will ﬁrst assume a viscous
friction force14F¼/C0avG, with ato be determined experi-
mentally and vGbeing the center-of-mass velocity.
Since the object does not rotate and all points translate at
the same speed, the kinetic energy is
EK¼1
2mL2_h2: (1)
The work-energy theorem DE¼~F/C1D~din a differential
form gives
dEK
dt¼ðPþFÞ/C1vGþTB/C1vBþTC/C1vC: (2)
As stated before, vB¼vC¼vG. For a circular motion,
the velocity is perpendicular to the threads, so TB:vB
¼TC:vC¼0. Equation (2)then gives
mL2_h€h¼/C0mgL _hsinðhÞ/C0aL2_h2: (3)
To ﬁrst order in h, sinðhÞ’h, and we obtain the usual
damped harmonic oscillator equation
€hþx0
Q_hþx2
0h¼0; (4)
with the undamped angular frequency x0¼2pf0¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g=Lp
and quality factor Q¼mx0=a. As we shall see below, we
recorded the smartphone’s linear acceleration €y. Since
y¼LsinðhÞ, we have to ﬁrst order in h
€y¼L€h; (5)
so the linear acceleration mimics the angular acceleration.
Our design has a high quality factor Q/C24500. The actual
pseudo-frequency f0ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1/C01=4Q2p
differs from f0by a few
parts per million, which is much less than the relative uncer-
tainty on f0itself. The gravity constant gis precisely known
in the vicinity of our lab:21g¼9:80428 m s–2. The main
uncertainty source is, thus, our measurement of the thread’slength L¼204061 mm. We, thus, ﬁnally expect for the
pseudo-frequency
f
0¼0:349060:0002 Hz : (6)
Fig. 1. (a) Sketch and (b) picture of our pendulum. The smartphone is
inserted in an envelope suspended by two parallel 2 m-long almost inextensi-
ble threads. These threads are wound on a ruler to allow both precise geome-
try and easy clamping onto a building beam. The smartphone’s overall
motion is circular, but the body does not rotate around its center of mass.
The envelope orientation remains parallel to its orientation at rest: each pointwithin the envelope follows a circular path with radius L, but each with a
different center, e.g., AforB,DforC, and O
0forG.
Fig. 2. (a) Picture showing the slight deformation when the smartphone is inserted despite the wooden stick inserted to stiffen the envelope. (b) Comp arison of
the different values of the pseudo-frequency as determined by: f0(black: damped harmonic oscillator model), fFFT(red: FFT of the recorded data points), fﬁt
(green: damped sine wave ﬁt), and fZC(blue: zero-crossing times linear regression). The residual plot (Fig. 6(b)) shows that the explanation for this inconsis-
tency is the variation of the frequency over time.
345 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Mathevet et al. 345 04 October 2023 23:08:13
C. Experiment
The accelerometer data are recorded using the app
Phyphox developed at Aachen University.22It provides wire-
less connection with a computer for easy data transfer andremote control of data acquisition. The pendulum is set inthexy-plane, a few degrees from its equilibrium position,
using a sewing thread. We let the system settle down for awhile and then burn or cut the thread to release the pendulumas smoothly as possible. Acquisition is started a few oscilla-tions later (Fig. 3). For comparison with f
0, we ﬁrst perform
a FFT on the raw data (black curve in Fig. 4(b)). This wide-
spread algorithm is quite often misunderstood by beginnerstudents and used as a black box. Moreover, it is not easy tomake sense of the peak’s width regarding frequency uncer-tainty. In particular, as we shall see below, the frequencyactually drifts slightly during the motion. This effect contrib-utes to peak broadening and is completely hidden using theFourier transform. Nevertheless, FFT provides an easy andquick rough estimate.
The fundamental peak is found at f
FFT¼0:3486
60:0005 Hz. The peak is slightly asymmetrical and under-
sampled so we have taken its half width at half maximum(HWHM) as a conservative value of the uncertainty. Themeasured f
FFTis consistent with f0obtained from the damped
oscillator model (Eqs. (4)and(6)) at the 1 r-level with a rela-
tive precision on the order of 0.15% (Fig. 2(b)). We, thus,
have a good overall understanding of both the experimentaland theoretical aspects of our system.Before we proceed to a more detailed analysis, let us now
present a simple and revealing experiment that we performed
to demonstrate a particular feature of our setup (not proposedto our students).
D. Model confirmation
As stated in Sec. II B, the double thread suspension implies
that the oscillation frequency is independent of both total mass
and mass geometry. We ﬁrst add in the envelope a heavy pieceof brass. The total weight of the system is more than doubled
without shifting the center of gravity much (Fig. 4(a)). Second,
we inserted a slab of corrugated cardboard below the smart-phone. This signiﬁcantly lifts up the center of mass of the sys-
tem by 75 mm, i.e., 3.5% of L, while leaving the total mass
nearly constant. In both cases, as seen in Fig. 4(b), the oscilla-
tion pseudo-frequency is hardly affected. Its very small decrease
(/C240:2%) is attributed to thread elongation ( /C244m m )a f t e rt h e
heavy brass piece has been inserted.
III. CURVE FITTING
While curve ﬁtting was not required of our students in this
project, we can gain some valuable information by using it.
A. Model curve
Equation (4)has a simple solution usually introduced in
the ﬁrst few years of undergraduate education
Fig. 3. (a) Raw data and (b) ﬁrst few seconds of the record showing oversampling of the data allowing strong noise reduction through low pass ﬁltering
(red line).
Fig. 4. (a) A piece of brass or cardboard is inserted in the envelope to change the total mass and mass geometry. (b) Close view of the fundamental peak of t he
FFT power density spectrum of €y: smartphone alone (black), smartphone and brass piece (red), and smartphone lifted up by a cardboard piece (blue). The slight
decrease in frequency is attributed to the elongation of the threads after the heavy brass piece has been inserted.
346 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Mathevet et al. 346 04 October 2023 23:08:13
h¼h0e/C0t=2scosx0ðt/C0t0Þ ðÞ ; (7)
where we introduced the relaxation time of energy
s¼Q=x0.h0andt0depend on the initial conditions. From
Eq.(5), the horizontal acceleration may be written
€y¼ay0e/C0t=2scosx0ðt/C0t0Þ ðÞ ; (8)
where we neglected the terms coming from the derivative of
the exponential decay as Q/C291.
B. Best fit
We use the above damped sine wave to ﬁt our data using
OriginPro 2016 software. We get a seemingly satisfactory
result (Fig. 5(a)) with good statistical estimators: reduced
v2<0:005 and R2’0:97. The program determines the
pseudo-frequency with impressive precision ffit¼0:348 413
61:01 0/C06Hz. Moreover, the oscillation amplitude is cor-
rectly reproduced, except perhaps towards the very start andend of the recording. f
ﬁtis consistent with our previous mea-
surement fFFTwithin the error bars but disagrees with the
model prediction f0(Fig. 2(b)). There is a contradiction, and
a more careful inspection of the data is required. We will use
a less common, although very efﬁcient technique: residual
plots.
C. Residues
Residues are the difference, for each data point, between
the actual and ﬁtted values. Residues, hence, magnify the
discrepancies that may not be clearly visible on full scale ﬁg-
ures such as Fig. 5(a). In principle, the ﬁtted curve captures
all the deterministic part of the data. Residues are expected
to be randomly distributed and so plotting them provides a
visual representation of the noise level of the data. However,contrary to these expectations, the residues shown here in
Fig. 5(b) exhibit a deterministic oscillatory shape with typi-
cal amplitude exceeding 10% of the maximum acceleration.So, our ﬁtted curve is no good at all, despite its apparent
agreement.
Close inspection of the beginning and the end of the
record shows that the ﬁtting curve slowly shifts fromthe data, demonstrating a kind of Moir /C19e effect (Fig. 5(b)).
The randomly selected few periods shown in Fig. 5(a)are in
phase with the model only by chance.As the damped sine wave model in Eq. (8)has a constant
pseudo-period, we can conclude that the frequency of the
measured data slowly drifts. The two techniques used so far
cannot describe such an effect.
IV. MORE DETAILED ANALYSIS
A. Pseudo-period determination
Instead of the pseudo-frequency, we may alternatively
determine the pseudo-period directly from the accelerationtime series. The pseudo-period is best determined from the
acceleration zero crossings times t
0ðnÞ, where nis the rank
index of the half period. Measurements between successivemaxima or minima4,5,11give worse results due to lower sta-
tistics (only one point per period is involved) and the greater
effect of noise around a stationary point.
First of all, we remove a possible offset from the raw data;
we discard a few points at both ends of the record to selectan (almost) integer number of oscillation periods. Then we
compute the mean value within this subset, which has been
substracted to the whole dataset.
We identify zero-crossing times by looking for a sign change
between two neighbouring points. Due to a combination of noisydata with the high sampling rate, typically 200 Hz, the data may
exhibit several sign changes around a single zero crossing. One
solution is to use a low-pass ﬁlter to remove high frequencynoise (see Fig. 3(b)). After the ﬁlter is applied to the data, there
is only one sign change per zero crossing, and so the zero cross-
ing can be localized within half the sampling time (typically a
few milliseconds, i.e., a thousandth of the oscillation period).
We also propose to our students a more advanced technique
of accurately estimating zero-crossing times, interesting from
a pedagogical point of view as it implements local approxima-
tion of a function. We extract from the dataset a sample oftypically 20 data points on both sides of a sign change that wepreviously located using the ﬁrst technique. We then perform
a linear ﬁt on this subset and compute a better approximation
of the actual zero-crossing time from the regression parame-ters. This algorithm is, thus, quite effective as it enhancesboth noise ﬁltering and time resolution.
Typical results for zero-crossing times are shown in Fig.
6(a)together with a linear ﬁt as expected for the damped oscil-
lator model Eq. (8). At ﬁrst sight, agreement seems perfect,
which is conﬁrmed by the statistical estimators: reduced
v
2<0:01 and R2r o u n d e dt o1b yt h ed a t aa n a l y s i ss o f t w a r e .
The pseudo-period is twice the slope. We get TZC¼2:868 68
64/C210/C05s from which we determine the pseudo-frequency
Fig. 5. (a) A few periods around 480 s: raw data (black dots) and damped sine ﬁt (red line). Inset: full record. Agreement seems quite satisfactory. (b) R esidues
from the ﬁt showing a large and structured discrepancy between the data and the ﬁtted curve.
347 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Mathevet et al. 347 04 October 2023 23:08:13
fZC¼0:348 5960:5/C210/C05Hz. fZCis consistent with our
two previous measurement fﬁtandfFFTbut disagrees with the
model prediction f0(Fig. 2(b)).
However, we ﬁnd that the residual plot (Fig. 6(b)) clearly
demonstrates that the data points are not described well bystraight line with the residual errors having a somewhat para-
bolic shape as a function of time, rather than the random
scatter that would be expected if the underlying function wastruly linear. The oscillation frequency is not constant, mean-
ing that nonlinear terms must be taken into account.
B. Amplitude variation
The damped harmonic oscillator model also predicts an
exponential decay of the amplitude. The students test thisproperty by plotting in log-scale the absolute value of the
acceleration (Fig. 7(a)). Instead of the expected linearly
decreasing envelope, we observe a concave shape with a typ-ical deviation from the straight line by /C2415% in the middle
of the record. Since the decay is faster than expected at the
beginning and then slows down, this implies that viscous
damping (which is linearly proportional to velocity) is notthe only dissipation mechanism in the experiment.
C. Numerical simulations
For the sake of completeness, we have performed numeri-
cal simulations and supplied them in the supplementarymaterial.
23These are not discussed with our students.
However, we demonstrate here that (i) anharmonicity of the
gravitational potential is not the main source of the nonline-
arity of the restoring force, and (ii) aerodynamic drag pro-portional to velocity squared contributes signiﬁcantly to
damping. In the end, our model reaches a 10
/C03relative accu-
racy level over the whole recorded time series.
V. PEDAGOGICAL ASPECTS
A. Project structure and objectives
The harmonic oscillator and harmonic approximation are
widely taught in many areas of physics: mechanics, electricity,
Drude–Lorentz model, IR spectroscopy, Debye model, etc. We
have developed the detailed analysis presented above over twoyears for use in a physics project given to ﬁrst year undergrad-
uate students. These students follow a selective two year
course somewhat particular to the French education system,which is signiﬁcantly more intensive, especially in physics and
mathematics, than our Undergraduate University Training.
24
This project is given in the form of a comprehensive scien-
tiﬁc investigation performed during a two-week holiday. Thestudents are guided throughout their investigation process by
a ten-page document. For data analysis purposes, a Python
program that they are free to modify is provided on a collab-orative platform (see the supplementary material for the doc-
ument and program, in French). The program does not
Fig. 6. (a) t0ðnÞare the zero-crossing times of €ysuccessively numbered by n(black points). Red line: linear adjustment hardly distinguished from data points.
(b) Residual plot showing that the oscillation period is not constant but has a regular variation over time.
Fig. 7. (a) Maximum of the absolute value of the acceleration for each half period (black dots, in log-scale). Exponential decay, as predicted by the da mped
harmonic oscillator model, would produce a linearly decreasing amplitude (red dashed line), which is obviously not the case. (b) Numerical simulati ons, dis-
cussed in more detail in the supplementary material (Ref. 23) data are quite well reproduced by an almost equal contribution of viscous and aerodynamic
damping (red line).
348 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Mathevet et al. 348 04 October 2023 23:08:13
include part of the work presented here (Secs. II D,III B, and
IV C) but contains instead, a phase portrait and energetic
analysis not discussed here.
To keep the project attractive, it is not graded but students
are required to write a report (typically eight pages long23).
What we expect from our students is:
•the demonstration of the linearized equations of motionand energetic aspects,
•the construction of their own pendulum,
•the data acquisition, basic use of the Python program and
discussion within the harmonic framework,
•a ﬁrst attempt at residue analysis, and the log-scale
method presented in Sec. IV B.
The project is designed to lead them to realize that the
damped harmonic oscillator model presented in class is
highly relevant and captures most of the physical phenome-
non, but it is not entirely exact. Regarding the explanation ofthe nonisochronism of the oscillations, we expect them tomention the linearization of the sine term, even if, as dis-
cussed in Sec. IV C, it might not be the major contribution in
this type of setup. Concerning the nonexponential decay ofthe amplitude, we have no speciﬁc expectation as they have
little knowledge about aerodynamics at this stage. Thus, both
of these issues are expected to be only qualitatively invokedby the students. Ideally, they may understand that high qual-ity data may reveal some subtle effects if we are careful with
the analysis, alternating model improvement and better data
processing. We are quite aware that it is a very ambitiousgoal, and so far we have found that it is only partially
achieved. Nevertheless, we want to awaken their curiosity,
and we think the amusing dimension of doing real physicswith one’s smartphone may help.
B. Discussion
We gave this project for the ﬁrst time last year during the
ﬁrst lockdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The projectwas optional and conceived as a break during this very chal-
lenging period. Only half of the /C2445 students took part. In
those difﬁcult times, the students who did not get involvedsaid they were feeling too busy and had no time or energy to
devote to what they perceived as extra work. The reduced
interactions between themselves and with the teacher werealso often put forward as reasons. These special circumstan-ces also explain why half of the students who did participate
carried out only part of the work, essentially the playful pen-
dulum construction. However, most of the ten students whocompleted the whole assignment found it an interesting
experience and said they will reuse their smartphone for
future experimental work. A few of them were even quiteenthusiastic. These ﬁrst promising results, despite adverseconditions, led us to reiterate.
This year, under less restrictive lockdown conditions, the
project was compulsory. Eight students worked it alone and
36 worked in pairs. Half of the groups did the whole projecttogether, and the other half shared the tasks. We carried outa survey to identify their difﬁculties and appreciation of the
project
23(in French). Overall, only one group found this
experiment rather negative compared to 30 positive and 12quite positive. The main issues the participants reported
were difﬁculties in understanding some algorithms and part
of the theoretical aspects. Indeed, we did not include the full,derivation of Eq. (5), which uses several assumptions andlinearization steps. They appreciated the teacher dedicating
time to helpful discussions on these difﬁcult points. Finally,
after their reports had been evaluated and the survey com-
pleted, there was 2 h-long teaching sequence devoted tomore informal discussions with, here again, positive
feedback.
Concerning our pedagogical objectives, half of the stu-
dents suitably compared the different methods of period
determination, but rarely interpreted them (especially tak-
ing into account the error bars). A vast majority ( >30 stu-
dents) found the residues analysis interesting and realized
there are some nonlinearities in the real system. A few of
them proposed, though with no physical explanation, a v
2
damping.
Globally, we are satisﬁed with the practical, experimental,
and numerical aspects of the project. Our students took plea-
sure in doing the experiment themselves with some of themdisplaying even more initiative in the data analysis part.
Conversely, we have a more nuanced conclusion concerning
our demanding conceptual targets. We have the feeling thatmost students perceived that the damped harmonic oscillator
model is not the whole story, but without really understand-
ing there is more interesting physics behind the discrepan-
cies. Likewise, the use of reﬁned data analysis methods and
improved models is most often not properly appreciated andconceived as a mandatory exercise. This is not surprising for
ﬁrst year students; this project is a learning exercise about
how to take a careful scientiﬁc approach to nonlinear phys-ics, far beyond their learned skills at that age. However, the
work they produced and, more importantly, their questions,
were very encouraging. For the ﬁrst time, they built theirown experiment and collected exhaustive data that they had
to explain, as it is and not as it should be. This is far from the
usual practical work aimed at illustrating the formal course.As such, next year we will renew this experiment, further
improving the program with extra comments to more explic-
itly teach the scientiﬁc approach to unexplained results, and
adding more insight to the theoretical analysis.
As a ﬁnal remark, let us mention that we were quite
pleased that 20% of the students expressed regret that theprogram was completely provided to them. One student even
suggested broadening the project by proposing they write
their own code during their computer classes. This anecdote,though particularly rewarding, has certainly has no statistical
relevance. However, the survey shows that a signiﬁcant part
of the class really engaged in the project, even though theadvanced physical processes involved in the real system
were only very vagely imagined by most. Consequently, we
think that this project is useful for our ﬁrst year students. Itmight also be used fruitfully for graduate students, who
could perhaps more actively use their practical know-how
and wider theoretical knowledge to thoroughly understand
the real system.
Our project aims at stimulating our students’ curiosity by
the fun use of their own smartphone. The high quality datathat a smartphone provides can, in turn, lead the students to
deeper investigations of the physical processes involved. A
vast majority of our students enjoyed this project.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Deborah Brissiaud for valuable help in
preparing the manuscript.
349 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Mathevet et al. 349 04 October 2023 23:08:13
a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: renaud.mathevet@
lncmi.cnrs.fr. URL: https://ires.univ-tlse3.fr/sim/
1See bibliography in, e.g., J. Kuhn, “Relevant information about using a
mobile phone acceleration sensor in physics experiments,” Am. J. Phys.
82, 93–94 (2014).
2A. Kaps, T. Splith, and F. Stallmach, “Implementation of smartphone-
based experimental exercises for physics courses at universities,” Phys.
Educ. 56, 035004 (2021).
3M. N. S. Silva and J. T. Carvalho-Neto, “Manually driven harmonic oscil-
lator,” Phys. Educ. 56, 035006 (2020).
4P. Vogt and J. Kuhn, “Analyzing simple pendulum phenomena with a
smartphone acceleration sensor,” Phys. Teach. 50, 439–440 (2012).
5J. Briggle, “Analysis of pendulum period with an iPod touch/iPhone,”
Phys. Educ. 48, 285–288 (2013).
6T. Pierratos and H. M. Polatoglou, “Study of the conservation of mechani-
cal energy in the motion of a pendulum using a smartphone,” Phys. Educ.
53, 015021 (2018).
7C. Dauphin and F. Bouquet, “Physical pendulum experiment re-
investigated with an accelerometer,” Papers Phys. 10, 100008 (2018).
8J. C. Castro-Palacio et al. , “A quantitative analysis of coupled
oscillations using mobile accelerometer sensors,” Eur. J. Phys. 34,
737–744 (2013).
9J. C. Castro-Palacio et al. , “Using a mobile phone acceleration sensor in
physics experiments on free and damped harmonic oscillations,” Am. J.
Phys. 81, 472–475 (2013).
10D. Weiler and A. Bewersdorff, “Superposition of oscillation on the meta-
pendulum: Visualization of energy conservation with the smartphone,”
Phys. Teach. 57, 646–647 (2019).
11S. Aiola et al. , “Probing higher-order approximations in large
amplitude oscillations of a physical pendulum,” Phys. Educ. 46, 247–249
(2011).12U. Pili, R. Violanda, and C. Ceniza, “Measurement of g using a magnetic pen-
dulum and a smartphone magnetometer,” Phys. Teach. 56, 258–259 (2018).
13T. Splith, A. Kaps, and F. Stallmach, “Phase plot of a gravity pendulum
acquired via the MEMS gyroscope and magnetic ﬁeld sensors of asmartphone,” Am. J. Phys. 90, 314–316 (2022).
14D. Li, L. Liu, and S. Zhou, “Exploration of large pendulum oscillations
and damping using a smartphone,” Phys. Teach. 58, 634–636 (2020).
15S. Reinhold and M. Ziese, “Frequency doubling in a pendulum,” Eur. J.
Phys. 42, 025003 (2021).
16A. Amoroso and M. Rinaudo, “Study of oscillatory motion using smart-
phones and tracker software,” J. Phys. 1076 , 012013 (2018).
17M. Monteiro and A. C. Marti, “Resource letter MDS-1: Mobile devices
and sensors for physics teaching,” Am. J. Phys. 90, 328–343 (2022).
18L. Tuset-Sanchis et al. , “The study of two-dimensional oscillations using a
smartphone acceleration sensor: example of Lissajous curves,” Phys.
Educ. 50, 580–586 (2015).
19M. Monteiro, C. Cabeza, and A. C. Mart /C19ı, “Exploring phase space using
smartphone acceleration and rotation sensors simultaneously,” Eur. J.
Phys. 35, 045013 (2014).
20R. Mathevet et al. , “Une approche quantitative de la loi de Beer-Lambert
avec un smartphone - premie `re partie,” Bull. Union Professeurs Phys. Chim.
113, 1079–10989 (2019); “Une approche quantitative de la loi de Beer-
Lambert avec un smartphone - seconde partie,” ibid.113, 1357 (2019).
21For a detailed report on the actual gvalue see <https://infoterre.brgm.fr/
rapports/RC-56265-FR.pdf >.
22For more details on the Phyphox app see <https://phyphox.org/ >.
23See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/10.1119/
10.0010073 which contains description and code for numerical simulations,
handouts given to students (in French), and some further data analysis.
24See supplementary material of Ref. 23for more details on these aspects of
the French educative system.
350 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 Mathevet et al. 350 04 October 2023 23:08:13
