
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkJULY 01 2023
Resource Letter MP-4: The Manhattan Project and related
nuclear research 
B. Cameron Reed
Am. J. Phys.  91, 495–509 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0149901
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Resource Letter MP-3: The Manhattan Project and Related Nuclear Research
American Journal of Physics  (October 2016)
Resource Letter MP-2: The Manhattan project and related nuclear research
American Journal of Physics  (February 201 1)
Resource Letter MP-1: The Manhattan Project and related nuclear research
American Journal of Physics  (September 2005) 04 October 2023 22:53:22
RESOURCE LETTER
Resource Letters are guides for college and university physicists, astronomers, and other scientists to literature, websites, and other teaching a ids.
Each Resource Letter focuses on a particular topic and is intended to help teachers improve course content in a speciﬁc ﬁeld of physics or tointroduce nonspecialists to this ﬁeld. The Resource Letters Editorial Board meets annually to choose topics for which Resource Letters will be
commissioned during the ensuing year. Items in the Resource Letter below are labeled with the letter E to indicate elementary level or material of
general interest to persons seeking to become informed in the ﬁeld, the letter I to indicate intermediate level or somewhat specialized material, or t he
letter A to indicate advanced or specialized material. No Resource Letter is meant to be exhaustive and complete; in time there may be more than one
Resource Letter on a given subject. A complete list by ﬁeld of all Resource Letters published to date is at the website <http://ajp.dickinson.edu/
Readers/resLetters.html >. Suggestions for future Resource Letters, including those of high pedagogical value, are welcome and should be sent to
Professor Mario Belloni, Editor, AJP Resource Letters, Davidson College, Department of Physics, Box 6910, Davidson, NC 28035; e-mail:mabelloni@davidson.edu.
Resource Letter MP-4: The Manhattan Project and related nuclear
research
B. Cameron Reeda)
Department of Physics (Emeritus), Alma College, Alma, Michigan 48801
(Received 9 March 2023; accepted 19 April 2023)
This fourth Resource Letter on the Manhattan Project comprises over 140 new sources to complement
the 390 listed in the ﬁrst three on this topic. Books, review papers, and journal articles are cited for the
categories of general works; speciﬁc topics within the Manhattan Project; technical and historicalworks; biographies and autobiographies; international wartime programs, allied intelligence, and the
use of the bombs; postwar developments; and educational materials. A separate section lists videos
and websites.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0149901
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the publication of the ﬁrst Resource Letter on this
topic in 2005, awareness of nuclear issues has waxed andwaned. Perhaps the biggest change since then has been the
increasing awareness of climate change and the role nuclear
power will have to play as we transition away from fossilfuels. Tempering this are, as always, concerns with possibleaccidents, dual-use technologies, the politics of waste dis-posal, and developments surrounding nuclear weapons.North Korea continues to enhance both its weapons anddelivery systems (Ref. 120); enrichment activities continue
in Iran; “established” nuclear powers are undertaking expen-sive, long-term expansions and upgrades of their arsenals(Ref. 123); arms control agreements are being allowed to
expire; and sabre-rattling associated with Russia’s brutalinvasion of Ukraine has the world potentially closer to anuclear exchange than at any time since the height of theCold War in the 1980s; the world faces many nuclear issuesand choices (Ref. 36). Progress on nuclear arms limitations
and approaches to disarmament seems to be movingbackwards.
In combination with Resource Letters MP-1,
1M-2,2and
MP-3,3the sources listed here bring the total to over 500.
Those listed here include some that should have beenincluded in these earlier Resource Letters, but many arerecent; interest in the science, personalities, and legacy ofthe Manhattan Project continue apace. As with the previousinstallments in this series, I have had to draw the line some-where as to what topics, particularly of the “postwar” type,to exclude or touch upon only minimally for sake of com-pleteness. For example, the Chernobyl and Fukushima disas-ters are not strictly Manhattan issues, and histories ofpostwar weapons systems and tests could be the subject of
their own extensive bibliographies, although I do include
some sources along these lines likely to be of wide interest.
Also, I largely eschew sources whose focus is more towards
historical/sociological interpretations of nuclear issues,
although this too is a gray area.
The organization of this Resource Letter follows that of
Refs. 1–3; within each section, books are listed ﬁrst, fol-
lowed by journal and magazine articles; where appropriate,
sources are cross-referenced to the earlier installments in this
series. Section IIIlists video and websites. The web
addresses given here were correct as of the time of publica-
tions but of course can be volatile.
II. BOOKS AND JOURNAL ARTICLES
A. General works; synoptic overviews
1. “Resource Letter MP-1: The Manhattan Project and
related nuclear research,” B. C. Reed, Am. J. Phys. 73(9),
805–811 (2005). This and Refs. 2and3list a total of
nearly 400 sources of information on the Manhattan
Project and related nuclear research. (E, I, A)
2. “Resource Letter MP-2: The Manhattan Project and
related nuclear research,” B. C. Reed, Am. J. Phys. 79(2),
151–163 (2011). Sequel paper to Ref. 1. (E, I, A)
3. “Resource Letter MP-3: The Manhattan Project and
related nuclear research,” B. C. Reed, Am. J. Phys.
84(10), 734–745 (2016). Sequel paper to Refs. 1and2.
(E, I, A)
4.The History and Science of the Manhattan Project ,B .
C. Reed (Springer, Berlin, 2019). This revised edition of
Ref. 3of MP-3 includes a new chapter on the German
495 Am. J. Phys. 91(7), July 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 495 04 October 2023 22:53:22
wartime nuclear program, a new section on the feed mate-
rials program of the Manhattan Project, an extensiveindex, and a number of corrections and clariﬁcations. (I)
5.Manhattan Project: The Story of the Century ,B .C .
Reed (Springer, Berlin, 2020). A popular version of Ref.
4. Recommended for readers seeking a non-mathematical
but technically credible coverage of the Project. (E)
6.The Manhattan Project: A Very Brief Introduction to
the Physics of Nuclear Weapons , B. C. Reed (Morgan
and Claypool, San Rafael, CA, as part of IoP ConcisePhysics, 2017). This book is a companion volume to Ref.4of MP-3 and presents a brief coverage of the physics
underlying nuclear weapons at a level suitable for under-graduate students. See also Ref. 28of MP-2, which is
now in a fourth edition. (I)
7.The Neutron’s Long Shadow: Legacies of Nuclear
Explosives Production in the Manhattan Project ,M .
Miller (Schiffer Publishing, Atglen, PA, 2017). This beau-
tifully produced book comprises dozens of high-quality
black and white photographs of Manhattan Project facilities,including some in their present-day conditions. The photo-graphs are expertly composed and powerfully convey asense of the scale, complexity, and functionality of installa-tions such as reactors and enrichment plants. Accompanyingtext describes how each facility operated. (E)
8.Inward Bound: Of Matter and Forces in the Physical
World , A. Pais (Oxford U.P., Oxford, 1986). This is a
superb history of the development of atomic, nuclear, andparticle physics from 1895 onwards. Pais explores devel-opments and the personalities associated with them indetail, giving numerous references to original literature.
For readers with advanced understanding of the technical-
ities involved. (A)
9.One World or None , D. Masters and K. Way (eds.)
(Latimer House, London, 1947). This slim book is a col-lection of essays originally published in the United Statesin 1946 as a report to the public on the dangers and oppor-tunities of the new atomic age; the edition listed here is aBritish reprint. Authors include Arthur Compton, PhilipMorrison, Robert Oppenheimer, Hans Bethe, Leo Szilard,Albert Einstein, and General Henry Arnold. While someof the essays are now dated, this volume is still worthreading to get a sense of how many of the individuals inti-mately involved with the Manhattan Project perceived the
implications of their work, particularly in the area of
international control of atomic energy. (E)
B. Specific topics within the Manhattan Project
10.Thorium Research in the Manhattan Project Era ,K .
F. Sorensen (University of Tennessee, Knoxville, 2014).Research into using thorium to breed ﬁssile U-233 inreactors as a potential backup to plutonium-239 wasbegun by Glenn Seaborg in 1940. This effort was hob-bled by difﬁculties in producing suitable fuel and con-tamination by highly radioactive uranium-232 and sowas eventually abandoned. This University of TennesseeMaster’s thesis by a student of nuclear engineering
relates this little-known aspect of the Manhattan Project.
The thesis is freely available at http://trace.tennes-
see.edu/utk_gradthes/2758/ . (I)
11.The Apocalypse Factory: Plutonium and the Making
of the Atomic Age , S. Olson (W. W. Norton, New York,2020). If plutonium had not been suitable as a nuclear
explosive, there would have been no Trinity or Nagasakibombs or Hanford Engineer Works; the entire nucleararms race would have been different. Olson, an experi-
enced science writer, gives a fast-paced and readable
history of Hanford, beginning with the discovery andisolation of plutonium and then moving on to the estab-lishment of the Manhattan Project, the selection of theHanford site, wartime operations, and ﬁnally the ColdWar and the site’s legacy of waste and health concerns.(E)
12.Plutopia: Nuclear Families, Atomic Cities, and the
Great Soviet and American Plutonium Disasters ,K .
Brown (Oxford U. P., Oxford, 2013). This book is acomparative history of life in two “atomic cities,” one inAmerica (Richland) and one in Russia (Ozersk), whichwere built to house workers at the two countries’ pluto-nium production plants, Hanford in Washington stateand Maiak in the southern Urals. For professional fami-lies, particularly in Hanford, life was good, with secure,well-paying jobs, safe communities, and good schools.
This came at the cost, however, of the constant presence
of security forces, discriminatory hiring practices, segre-gated housing, environmental damage, medical monitor-ing, unethical radiation experiments, illnesses and birthdefects allegedly caused by radioactivity, dangerous jobsfor lower-level workers, accident cover-ups, and legaciesof waste; some of the parallels between the two locationsare striking. (E)
13.Polonium in the Playhouse: The Manhattan Project’s
Secret Chemistry Work in Dayton, Ohio ,L .C .
Thomas (Trillium, Columbus, OH, 2017). In 1943, theMonsanto Chemical Company established a poloniumextraction and puriﬁcation operation in Dayton, Ohio,under the direction of Charles Allen Thomas, theauthor’s grandfather. The Dayton project was in someways more secret than Los Alamos; not declassiﬁed until1983, it has remained largely under the radar ofManhattan Project scholars. Two methods of acquiring
polonium were developed: Extracting it from lead-oxide
ore residues from Canadian radium and uranium-miningoperations, and, more productively, from slugs of bis-muth which underwent neutron irradiation in theProject’s reactors at Oak Ridge and Hanford. Ultimately,Dayton provided the polonium used in the neutron initia-tors used to trigger the Trinity, Hiroshima, and Nagasakibombs. This very readable, well-illustrated book relatesthe stories of the Dayton project and Charles Thomas’career. See also Ref. 20. (I)
14.Images of America: The Manhattan Project at
Hanford Site , E. Toomey (Arcadia, Charleston, SC,
2015). This book is in the same series as MP-3, Refs. 13
and14, and features photos of life and work at Hanford,
other Paciﬁc Northwest wartime facilities such asBoeing’s Seattle plant, the Grand Coulee dam, airﬁelds,and among native tribes. The emphasis is on Hanford,
with images documenting the scale of construction and
operations and aspects of day-to-day life in trying condi-tions. Many of the photos were taken by RobleyJohnson, who supervised DuPont’s photography crew atthe site. (E)
15.Tinian and the Bomb: Project Alberta and Operation
Centerboard , D. A. Farrell (Micronesian Publications,
Tinian Island, 2018). This well-illustrated and
496 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 496 04 October 2023 22:53:22
meticulously referenced book tells the story of how
operations for the Army Air Force’s 509th CompositeGroup, which conducted the Hiroshima and Nagasakibombing missions, were organized and administered.
Republished in 2020 by Stackpole Books under the title
Atomic Bomb Island . (E)
16.On the Home Front: The Cold War Legacy of the
Hanford Nuclear Site , M. S. Gerber, 3rd ed.
(University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, 2007). InFebruary 1986, the Department of Energy released19,000 pages of documents on the history of the HanfordEngineer Works, which revealed that radioactive andchemical wastes far in excess of what had previouslybeen disclosed had been emitted at the site. Gerber givesa detailed account of the types of processes and contami-nations involved, and ongoing remediation efforts. (I)
17.The Manhattan Project Trinity Test: Witnessing the
Bomb in New Mexico ,E .K . €Osterreich (The History
Press, Charleston, SC, 2020). This slim paperback con-tains little technical detail on the Trinity test, but doesgather eyewitness accounts by scientists and local resi-dents and summarizes some of the medical conditions
suffered by residents in the years after the test; the impli-
cation is that those conditions were linked to the test.There are occasional surprising factual errors, such asmisidentifying the bomber which carried the Nagasakibomb. (E)
18.Birthplace of the Atomic Bomb: A Complete History
of the Trinity Test Site , William S. Loring (McFarland,
Jefferson, NC, 2019). This comprehensive 400-page vol-ume should be on the shelf of anybody interested in theTrinity test. With extensive citations to Los Alamosdocuments, Loring gives a detailed chronological surveyof the Trinity site from 1939 to the present with thelion’s share of the discussion covering 1944 and 1945.Topics discussed include site selection, acquisition, sur-veying, and preparation; road construction; instrumenta-tion and photography requirements; the frustrations ofbureaucratic supply chain delays; Base Camp; the
Jumbo program; security procedures; weather forecast-
ing; radiation protection; concerns with legal liability;the 100-ton TNT test; the test itself, radiological mea-surements, and postwar legal wrangling between theArmy, Air Force, Atomic Energy Commission, and theNational Park Service over administration of the site.Contains many photographs not usually seen. An appen-dix contains the text of the press releases GeneralGroves prepared in advance of the test. (I)
19. “Project SOLO and the Seborers: On the Trail of a
Fourth Soviet Spy at Los Alamos,” H. Klehr and E.Haynes, Stud. Intell. 63(3), 1–14 (2019). This paper,
which appears in an open CIA journal, reveals the iden-tity of a fourth Soviet spy at Los Alamos, Oscar Seborer.This conclusion is based on information in FBI ﬁlesdeclassiﬁed in 2019. Seborer was American-born, buthis family was well-connected to communist causes and
Soviet intelligence. Trained as an electrical engineer, he
worked at Los Alamos as part of a group monitoringseismic effects of the Trinity test. The information hepassed on may have been considered to be of some sig-niﬁcance as the Soviets awarded him the Order of theRed Star in 1964; he died in Moscow in April 2015. (E)
20. “Rousing the dragon: Polonium production for
neutron generators in the Manhattan Project,” B. C.Reed, Am. J. Phys. 87(5), 377–383 (2019). During the
Manhattan Project, polonium was extracted from wasteradium-mining ores and synthesized in reactors for usein neutron-generating “initiators” used to trigger the
Little Boy, Trinity, and Fat Man bombs; see Ref. 13.
This paper describes the history of this program and thephysics behind computing neutron-generation and syn-thesis rates. (A)
21. “A diamond in dogpatch: The 75th anniversary of the
graphite reactor,” S. R. Greene, Nucl. News 61(12),
38–43 and 61(13) 28–31 (2018). This two-part article
describes the wartime and postwar histories of the X-10graphite reactor at Oak Ridge. Over its 20-year lifetime,X-10 made not only critical contributions to the successof the Manhattan Project, but also in various areas ofneutron physics studies and isotope production. Theauthor is a former director of Nuclear TechnologyPrograms at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. (E)
22. “The fogging of photographic ﬁlm by radioactive con-
tamination in cardboard packaging materials,” J. H.Webb, Phys. Rev. 74(3), 375–380 (1949). In August
1945, the Eastman Kodak Company began having prob-
lems with packages of x-ray ﬁlm being fogged by radio-
active contamination. The culprit proved to bestrawboard liners used to separate sheets of ﬁlm duringpackaging. The paper used in the liners came from a milllocated along the Wabash River in Indiana, and the con-tamination was traced to fallout of the Trinity test,particularly cesium-141. This isotope is a short-livedbeta-emitter (half-life 25 s) but is produced proliﬁcallyin nuclear explosions. This paper analyses this curiousside-effect of the Trinity test. See also https://interestin-
gengineering.com/when-kodak-accidentally-discovered-an-a-bomb-testing , and a YouTube video available at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v ¼7pSqk-XV2QM (A)
23. “Modeling the effects of the Trinity test,” T. Semkow, P.
Parekh, and D. Haines, in Applied Modeling and
Computations in Nuclear Science , American Chemical
Society Symposium Series 945 (American Chemical
Society, Washington, 2006), pp. 142–159. This remark-
able paper presents a detailed analysis of the Trinity testbased on a radiochemical analysis of a piece of Trinitite,including estimates of implosion compression, yield,number of prompt neutrons emitted, fast neutron ﬂuence,and debris characteristics. The derived yield is 21 :462
kilotons. See Ref. 53for a more recent estimate. (A)
24. “Chernobyl and trinity—Counting the Curies,” B. C.
Reed, Federation Am. Sci. Public Interest Rep. 69(2),
12–15 (2016). In his Manhattan District History , David
Hawkins (MP-1, Ref. 47) states that one witness to the
Trinity test estimated the prompt radioactivity releasedto be about a trillion curies. Working from an estimateof the Trinity yield and what is known of the distributionof prompt ﬁssion products, this article investigates thisclaim and concludes that the ﬁgure was more likely onthe order of 14 /C210
12. (I)
25. “Proceeding in the dark. Innovation, project manage-
ment and the making of the atomic bomb,” S. Lenﬂe.
This “working paper” by a French professor of businessexplores how the management of the Manhattan Projectdiffered in important ways from conventional projectmanagement procedures, such as having research, devel-opment, construction, and operations proceeding in par-allel, accompanied by frequent revisions to processes
497 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 497 04 October 2023 22:53:22
and designs as information and experience was acquired
(e.g., isotope separation methods and the spontaneous
ﬁssion crisis; implosion). Available at http://www.
sylvainlenﬂe.fr/images/Publications/Proceeding_in_the_
dark_Lenﬂe_WP08_001.pdf .( E )
26. “Uranium price expectations and stabilization policy for-
mation in the Manhattan Project: An institutional eco-
nomics approach,” A. D. M. Espana, J. Nucl. Eng.
Radiation Sci. 9(3), 031601 (16pp) (2023). It is often
thought that General Groves had a virtually unlimited
budget and was free to use it as he pleased, but the
Manhattan Engineer District operated within the same
system of regulations, negotiations, and contracts forprocurement as did all government departments. This
extensively referenced paper by an economist associated
with the Canadian Nuclear Laboratories (Chalk River)
uses the Manhattan Project as a case study to explore
modern uranium pricing and market policies and, hence,
analyzes the Project from a direction not normally
encountered in science-oriented treatments. (A)
27. “The ongoing story of Hiroshima and Nagasaki,” B. C.
Reed, Am. Sci. 106(2), 88–94 (2018). This popular-level
article explores the arguments for and against the bomb-
ings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki by presenting them in
the form of a three-way dialogue between students who
have just heard a lecture on the context of events sur-
rounding the end of the war. (E)
28. “Troy ounces (or tons) of silver,” D. S. Edmonds, Am. J.
Phys. 69(6), 629–630 (2001). This Letter to the Editor
describes the author’s experiences with calutron vacuum
systems at Oak Ridge. The title refers to the silver used
in magnet coils; see MP-2, Ref. 24. (E)
29. “The Smyth report,” H. D. Smyth, Princeton Univ.
Library Chronicle 37(3), 173–189 (1976). In this mem-
oir, Smyth describes the origins, preparation, and clear-
ance procedures involved with his famous 1945 Smyth
Report (MP-1, Ref. 2). (E)
30. “A brief history of radiation protection at HEW
1943–1960,” D. Marsh, Moderator 27(2), 4–6 (2021).
The level of radiation danger attending the plutonium
production reactors at the Hanford Engineer Works
(HEW) was unlike anything previously encountered by
radiologists. To develop exposure guidelines and moni-
toring protocols, extensive Medical and Health
Instruments departments were set up, staffed by over500 employees by mid-1945. This brief article in the
newsletter of the B Reactor Museum Association (MP-2,
Ref. 127;https://b-reactor.org ) describes this work. See
also Ref. 124. (E)
31. “Early reactors: From Fermi’s water boiler to novel
power prototypes,” M. E. Bunker, Los Alamos Sci. 7,
124–131 (1983). Reactor development during theManhattan Project was not limited to sites in Chicago,
Oak Ridge, Hanford, and Montreal. Two enriched-
uranium reactors were built at Los Alamos during thewar, and postwar years saw the development of several
installations for research and testing in support of weap-
ons programs and isotope production. Some of thedesigns were quite unique, such as one which used
93.5%-enriched uranium 235 dissolved in a solution of
phosphoric acid, and another fueled by molten pluto-nium and cooled by molten sodium. This article summa-
rizes this history to the time of its publication in 1983.
See also Ref. 52. (I)C. Technical and historical works
32.The Discovery of Nuclear Fission: A Documentary
History , H. G. Graetzer and D. L. Anderson (Van
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1971). This slim volume,although now out of print, is a valuable resource contain-ing an anthology of translations of all or parts of originalpapers which underlay the discovery of ﬁssion. Thework of such notable ﬁgures as Fermi and his group;Hahn, Meitner, and Strassman; Curie and Savitch;Meitner and Frisch and others appear, supplementedwith commentary and explanations of the relevant phys-ics and chemistry by the authors to help tie themtogether. An excellent adjunct to Ruth Sime’s biographyof Lise Meitner (MP-1, Ref. 79). (I)
33.Scientists in Power , S. R. Weart (Harvard, Cambridge,
1979). During the inter-war years, French scientists,
such as Jean Perrin, Paul Langevin, Ire `ne Curie, and
Fr/C19ederic Joiliot-Curie, were much more involved in poli-
tics and government than their British, American, andGerman counterparts, often successfully advocating forpublic support of scientists and research institutions.Weart surveys the history of French nuclear physics andtechnology from the early 1900s through to the estab-lishment of the postwar Commissariat a l’EnergieAtomic (CEA) and the development of the ﬁrst Frenchpostwar reactors, along with associated politcal develop-ments. (E)
34.The Discovery of Isotopes: A Complete Compilation ,
M. Thoennessen (Springer, Basel, 2016). This book doesnot concern the Manhattan Project per se but will be ofinterest to anyone interested in the history of nuclearphysics. Thoennessen chronicles the circumstances ofthe discovery of every isotope known to the time of pub-lication with subsequent discoveries listed in a compan-ion website at http://www.nscl.msu.edu/ /C24thoennes/
isotopes/ . The website includes an engaging animation
of the timeline of isotope discoveries. For some 3000
isotopes, Thoennessen lists place and method of discov-ery (instruments and reactions), references to originalpapers, decay mechanisms and energies, and other asso-ciated data. This remarkable reference is a must-have forany student, practitioner, or educator in the ﬁeld ofnuclear physics. (A)
35.The Age of Innocence: Nuclear Physics between the
First and Second World Wars , R. Stuewer (Oxford
U. P., Oxford, 2018). Stuewer, a distinguished historianof science, presents a detailed history of the remarkableexperimental, theoretical, and instrumental develop-ments in nuclear physics between the World Wars, whenresearchers worked in intense but respectful competition,frequently convening to share results and visit eachother’s institutions. This golden age began to disinte-grate with the arrival of Adolf Hitler as Chancellor ofGermany in 1933 and the resulting expatriation of manyEuropean scientists to England and America. The titlealludes to the period before the discovery of ﬁssionopened the ominous possibility of nuclear energy as a
military weapon. Contains an extensive bibliography
and list of references; well-illustrated. (I)
36.Nuclear Choices for the Twenty-First Century ,R .
Wolfson and F. Dalnoki-Veress (MIT Press, Cambridge,2021). This volume gives an excellent semi-popular
498 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 498 04 October 2023 22:53:22
survey of atomic structure, radioactivity, radiation, and
its measurement and uses, nuclear energy, how varioustypes of nuclear reactors function, reactor safety, wasteand fuel cycles, the history, functioning and effects of
nuclear weapons, nuclear defense and strategy, and
nuclear terrorism. (I)
37. “Explosive properties of reactor-grade plutonium,” J. C.
Mark, with an Appendix by Frank von Hippel andEdward Lyman, Sci. Global Secur. 17(2), 170–185
(2009). This paper is a reprint of one that initiallyappeared in Sci. Global Secur. 4(1), 111–128 (1993).
The primary author of this paper, J. Carson Mark(1913–1997), headed the Theoretical Division at LosAlamos from 1947 to 1973. The authors present an anal-ysis of the question of whether a terrorist organization orthreshold state could make use of plutonium acquiredfrom a light-water reactor to construct a nuclear explo-sive of signiﬁcantly damaging yield. They conclude thatthe difﬁculties of developing an effective weapon designwith reactor-grade plutonium are not appreciably greaterthan those which would be encountered with weapons-
grade plutonium. A pedagogical version of the yield
model discussed in this paper appears in MP-3, Ref. 34.
See also Ref. 114. (A)
38. “An act of creation: The Meitner-Frisch interpretation of
nuclear ﬁssion,” R. Stuewer, in Traditions and
Transformations in the History of Quantum Physics:Third International Conference on the History ofQuantum Physics , edited by S. Katzir, C. Lehner, and J.
Renn, Berlin, June 28–July 2, 2010 (Max PlanckResearch Library for the History and Development ofKnowledge, Proceedings 5, 2013). This paper is Chapter9 of a conference proceedings available at http://edition-
open-access.de/media/proceedings/5/Proceedings5.pdf .
Stuewer considers Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch’s inter-pretation of ﬁssion as an example of Arthur Koestler’stheory of creative acts being a synthesis of two previ-ously unrelated “matrices of thought.” Speciﬁcally,Meitner was well-versed in the “Berlin” tradition of
Carl Friedrich von Weizs €acker’s semi-empirical mass
formula, an essentially static description of nuclei,while Frisch was more familiar with Niels Bohr’s“Copenhagen” considerations of the energetics ofnuclear oscillations. In pooling their two differentstreams of knowledge, Meitner and Frisch came tounderstand the physics of ﬁssion. (I)
39. “Determining optimal fallout shelter times following a
nuclear detonation,” M. B. Dillon, Proc. Roy. Soc.A470 (2163), 2013693 (2014). This paper develops a
mathematical model for analyzing how long poorly shel-tered individuals should remain in their initial shelterbefore evacuating or heading to better shelter in theevent of a single low-yield (0.1–10 kt) nuclear detona-tion in an urban area. The author concludes that if anadequate shelter can be reached within 15 min, individu-als should stay in poor-quality shelters for at most
30 min after detonation, while if adequate shelter is
available within 5 min, they should proceed immediatelyto the better shelter. (A)
40. “Science and politics: The discovery of nuclear ﬁssion
75 years ago,” R. L. Sime, Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 526(3-4),
A27–A31 (2014). This brief article gives a compact butthorough description of how work performed by OttoHahn, Lise Meitner, and Fritz Strassmann culminated inthe discovery and interpretation of ﬁssion, and of how
Meitner’s role in the work came to be deprecated due toher forced emigration from Germany in mid-1938. See
also Sime’s excellent biography of Meitner (MP-1 Ref.
79); related papers are MP-2, Refs. 40,41,66, and MP-
3, Ref. 57. (I)
41. “An examination of the potential ﬁssion-bomb weapo-
nizability of nuclides other than
235U and239Pu,” B. C.
Reed, Am. J. Phys. 85(1), 38–44 (2017). This paper
examines how the physics of ﬁssion barriers and decay
modes conspire to make uranium-235 and plutonium-
239 the only isotopes feasible for powering nuclearweapons. (A)
42. “Why only U-235 and Pu-239? Classroom-level graphs
for understanding heavy-element weaponizability
factors,” B. C. Reed, Phys. Teach. 58(8), 556–559
(2020). This paper is a lower-level distillation of Ref.
41, suitable for presentation to a class of non-majors. (I)
43. “A physicists guide to The Los Alamos Primer,” B. C.
Reed, Phys. Scr. 91(11), 113022 (2016). This paper
describes the background to and analyzes the physics
contained in Robert Serber’s Los Alamos Primer , the
notes of lectures given to scientists arriving at Los
Alamos in April 1943 (MP-1, Ref. 48). (A)
44. “Revisiting The Los Alamos Primer,” B. C. Reed,
Physics Today 70(9), 42–49 (2017). This article reviews
the background and contents of Robert Serber’s Los
Alamos Primer , the packet of notes given to scientists as
they arrived for orientation lectures at Los Alamos inApril 1943 (MP-1, Ref. 48). (I)
45. “A powerful graphical display of technical information:
Robert Serber’s plot of physical conditions inside a
nuclear explosion,” B. C. Reed, Am. J. Phys. 88(7),
565–567 (2020). In his 1943 Los Alamos Primer (MP-1,
Ref. 48; Ref. 43), Robert Serber presented a striking
graph of the time-evolution of conditions of neutron den-sity, energy density, and pressure within the exploding
core of a nuclear weapon. This paper presents a fresh
version of the graph and describes its preparation. (A)
46. “A toy model for the yield of a tamped ﬁssion bomb,” B.
C. Reed, Am. J. Phys. 86(2), 105–109 (2018). This paper
develops compact expressions for the yield and efﬁ-
ciency of a tamped ﬁssion bomb based on modeling neu-tron growth as a geometric progression combined with
an analysis of the physics of a tamped core; see also MP-
2, Ref. 32. (A)
47. “The fortuitous chain reaction,” J. M. Pearson, Am. J.
Phys. 87(4), 264–269 (2019). This paper is a companion
paper to MP-3, Ref. 39. In this paper, Pearson takes an
intriguing counterfactual view of physics, arguing howsmall changes to physical factors such as the alpha-
decay half-life of U-235 or the scission point in the
ﬁssion process would render a ﬁssion chain reactionimpossible. See also Refs. 48and49. (A)
48. “Calculating ﬁssility without Legendre polynomials: A
walk in the woods,” J. M. Pearson, Am. J. Phys. 87(9),
739–744 (2019). This paper is a companion paper toMP-3, Ref. 39and a sequel to Ref. 47. Pearson examines
how Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch might have conceived
of ﬁssion during their famous walk in the woods inSweden in late 1938, proposing that, instead of dealing
with the complexities of Rayleigh’s theory of vibrating
drops and Legendre polynomials, Frisch’s familiarity
499 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 499 04 October 2023 22:53:22
with the formation of droplets in a Wilson cloud cham-
ber might have sufﬁced. (A)
49. “Comment on “Calculating ﬁssility without Legendre
polynomials,” B. C. Reed, Am. J. Phys. 87(10), 785–786
(2019). This paper, a response to Ref. 48, presents an
alternate view of Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch’s walk in
the woods, suggesting that the interpretation of nuclearﬁssion might have unfolded over several days and thatFrisch might well have worked on a partially related cal-culation earlier in his career. (A)
50. “Composite cores and tamper yield: Lesser-known
aspects of Manhattan Project ﬁssion bombs,” B. C.Reed, Am. J. Phys. 88(2), 108–114 (2020). This paper
explores the physics of composite bomb cores, whichuse a combination of U-235 and Pu-239 as opposed toeither one alone; such arrangements can achieve a signif-icant saving in the amount of ﬁssile material required fora bomb of a given yield. The issue of what fraction ofthe yield of the Trinity and Nagasaki Fat Man bombs
were due to high-energy neutrons inducing ﬁssions inthe U-238 tampers of those weapons is also considered.Composite cores were considered by Oppenheimer fol-
lowing the Trinity test but were not put into production
at the time.
51. “Pedagogical reconstruction of Bohr and Wheeler’s
ﬁssion-barrier graph,” B. C. Reed, Eur. J. Phys. 41(5),
055801 (10pp) (2020). In their famous 1939 paper on thephysics of ﬁssion (MP-1, Ref. 123), Niels Bohr and John
Wheeler presented an eye-catching graph of the ﬁssionbarrier energy for various nuclides. Unfortunately, someof the analytic details underlying exactly how this graphwas constructed were unclear, and deﬁnitions of variousquantities in their analysis were not internally consistent.In this paper, a simpliﬁed approach to develop this graphis presented. The development is sensibly true to theiranalysis, and appropriate for an upper-level student audi-ence. See also MP-2, Refs. 29and30.( I )
52. “An inter-country comparison of nuclear pile develop-
ment during World War II,” B. C. Reed, Eur. Phys. J. - H.46, 15 (22pp) (2021). Between the time of the discovery
of nuclear ﬁssion in early 1939 and the end of 1946,
approximately 90 “nuclear piles” were constructed in sixcountries. These ranged from simple graphite columnscontaining neutron sources but no uranium to others ascomplex as the water-cooled 250-MW plutonium produc-tion reactors at Hanford. This paper summarizes and com-pares these piles. (I)
53. “Special issue on the Manhattan Project nuclear science
and technology development at Los Alamos NationalLaboratory,” Nucl. Technol. 207(S1), S1–S396 (2021).
This publication is a special edition of a technical jour-nal for nuclear engineers. In the summer of 2020, a semi-nar was held at Los Alamos to commemorate the 75thanniversary of the Trinity test. Participants reviewed sci-entiﬁc and engineering breakthroughs made during theManhattan Project and wrote up their contributions; thispublication, edited by Mark Chadwick of the Physics
division at Los Alamos, comprises the unclassiﬁed ones.
The papers are freely available at https://www.ans.org/
pubs/journals/nt/volume-207/#number1S and cover
nuclear science and engineering, hydrodynamics, highexplosives, plutonium metallurgy, nuclear energy andyield, historical technical issues, and Trinity, which isnow assessed as having had a yield of 24 :862 kilotons.Los Alamos has prepared a YouTube video featuring
Chadwick; see https://www.youtube.com/watch?v ¼a_
WYcTHco00 . Also, the summer 2021 edition of Los
Alamos’ National Security Science magazine contains
an article on how the seminar was organized and lists thetitles of classiﬁed papers; see https://discover.lanl.gov/
publications/national-security-science/2021-summer/ (A)
54. “Manhattan Project 1940s research on the prompt ﬁssion
neutron spectrum,” M. B. Chadwick and R. Capote,Front. Phys. 11, 1105593 (2023). A signiﬁcant parameter
in the design of ﬁssion weapons is the spectrum of neu-tron energies emitted in ﬁssions. This paper, co-authoredby the editor of Ref. 53, explores pre-World War II and
Los Alamos work on the neutron spectrum, which wasremarkably well-determined by 1945. Also available athttps://doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2023.1105593 . (A)
55. “The earliest DT nuclear fusion discoveries,” M. B.
Chadwick et al. , This paper appeared in preprint form as
this Resource Letter was being prepared; it is a LosAlamos report available at https://arxiv.org/abs/
2302.04206 . At Los Alamos during the war, consider-
able research was carried out on fusion reactions inresponse to the recognition of the possibility of fusionweapons, an issue which arose during a conference heldat Berkeley in the summer of 1942. This paper describespre-war, wartime, and postwar cross-section measure-ments, which are in good agreement with modern values.An interesting revelation is that DT fusion was likelyﬁrst detected in an experiment performed at theUniversity of Michigan in 1938, an event which mayhave played a role in the 1942 Berkeley discussion. Arelated article can be found in Nucl. News 66(4), 70–77
(2023), and an audio clip extracted from a 1986 inter-
view of Emil Konopinski discussing hydrogen reactionscan be found at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v ¼
z5cQgu5xCnc . (A)
56. “Comments on the physics of The Frisch-Peierls memo-
randum,” B. C. Reed, Nucl. Technol. 208(12),
1890–1893 (2022). The Frisch-Peierls memorandum of
early 1940 is arguably one of the most important docu-ments of the nuclear age; see MP-1, Refs. 14,48,77,
and81. Unfortunately, some republications of the tech-
nical part of the document have introduced variouserrors, which could lead an unaware reader to thinkingthat Frisch and Peierls got their analysis of the criticalmass very muddled. This is in fact not so; this paperpoints out the problems with incorrect versions andattempts to clarify the situation. (A)
57. “Unclassiﬁed controlled nuclear information and
restricted data concerning U. S. calutrons,” A. S. Quist,Oak Ridge National Laboratory Report ORCA-3 (1999).This 37-page report gives detailed information on thecharacteristics of the “calutron” electromagnetic separa-tors used to isolate U-235 during the Manhattan Project.Information includes vacuum systems, magnetic ﬁelds,ion-beam focusing, and methods used to extract enricheduranium from the equipment. Available at https://
www.osti.gov/scitech/biblio/1291336 . (E)
D. Biographical and autobiographical works
58.Atomic Bomb Scientists Memoires 1939–1945.
Interviews with Werner Heisenberg ,Paul Harteck,
500 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 500 04 October 2023 22:53:22
Lew Kowarski, Leslie R. Groves, Aristid von Grosse,
and C. E. Larson , J. J. Ermenc (Meckler, Westport, CT,
1989). Transcripts of interviews conducted in the late1960s and 1970s by Joseph Ermenc, an emeritus profes-
sor at Dartmouth College. The interviews were part of
an effort to help address the lack of technological liter-acy characteristic of liberal arts education. (E)
59.The Bethe-Peierls Correspondence , S. Lee (World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2008). This volume is a compan-ion to MP-2, Ref. 57. Rudolf Peierls and Hans Bethe met
as students at the University of Munich in 1926 andmaintained a lifelong frienship until Peierls’ passing in1995. During that time, they exchanged numerous letterson both physics and personal matters in both Germanand English; they also both worked in the TheoreticalDivision at Los Alamos during 1944–1945. In this vol-ume, Sabine Lee of the University of Birmingham hasassembled the original letters plus translations of thosein German. The letters are arranged chronologically withoccasional editorial additions. (I)
60.Atomic rivals: A candid memoir of rivalries among
the Allies over the bomb , B. Goldschmidt (Rutgers
U. P., New Brunswick, NJ, 1990). This volume is an
English translation of the memoires of French physicistand later nuclear administrator/diplomat BertrandGoldschmidt, in particular covering his experiences atthe Montr /C19eal laboratory of the Manhattan Project; see
Ref. 85. Before the war, Goldschmidt trained as Marie
Curie’s last assistant at the Radium Institute in Paris andhad a ﬁrst-hand view of research carried out there. InMontr /C19eal, he worked on the chemistry of plutonium and
polonium extraction and was involved with informingCharles de Gaulle of the development of the bomb. Thismemoire is full of insider details and observations on thepersonalities and rivalries of the Montr /C19eal group, which
felt disrespected by American and British ofﬁcials. Afterthe war, Goldschmidt became deeply involved with theFrench nuclear program and served as a delegate to theInternational Atomic Energy Agency. A limitation of
this book is its very minimal number of references. (E)
61.Churchill’s Bomb: How the United States Overtook
Britain in the First Nuclear Arms Race , G. Farmelo
(Basic Books, New York, 2013). This carefully refer-enced volume explores British Prime Minister WinstonChurchill’s involvement with that country’s nuclear pro-grams from its beginnings in 1940 through the develop-ment of fusion weapons. The title of this book issomewhat misleading as there never really was a race,but the British-US wartime nuclear relationship was fullof twists and turns with the British appreciating early onthe potential of nuclear weapons thanks to the Frisch-Peierls memorandum but eventually settling for a statusas junior partner in the vast American effort. This bookand Kevin Ruane’s study of Churchill, Ref. 62, comple-
ment each other. (E)
62.Churchill and the Bomb in War and Cold War ,K .
Ruane (Bloomsbury Academic, London, 2016). This
book explores Churchill’s evolving thoughts on nuclearweapons in three epochs: as a bomb-maker(1941–1945), atomic diplomatist (1945–1949), and, fol-lowing the Soviets’ development of their own nuclearweapons and the emergence of the hydrogen bomb, as a“nuclear peacemaker” who advocated for but never suc-ceeded in getting his American counterparts to agree to aUS/UK/Soviet summit. Churchill’s thinking eventually
arrived at acceptance of a mutual-assured-destruction-like “defense by deterrents” balance of terror. (E)
63.The Pope of Physics: Enrico Fermi and the Birth of
the Atomic Age , G. Segre ` and B. Hoerlin (Henry Holt,
New York, 2016). This excellent biography of Fermi is
written by Gino Segre ` and his wife Bettina Hoerlin;
Gino is the nephew of Fermi’s student Emilio Segre `,
who wrote his own biography of Fermi in 1970 (MP-1,Ref. 72). The authors give a thorough treatment of
Fermi’s career and personal life from his youth to thestoic way he faced his approaching death due to stomachcancer at the age of 53. (E)
64.The Last Man Who Knew Everything: The Life and
Times of Enrico Fermi, Father of the Nuclear Age ,D .
N. Schwartz (Basic Books, New York, 2017). This biog-raphy of Fermi is longer than that of Ref. 63and does a
more comprehensive job of setting Fermi’s work in thecontext of the major developments of twentieth-centuryphysics. Both should be read to get a full picture of thelife and times of a remarkable physicist. (E)
65.Half-Life: The Divided Life of Bruno Pontecorvo,
Physicist or Spy , F. Close (Basic Books, New York,
2015). Bruno Pontecorvo was a brilliant physicist whobegan his career as one of Enrico Fermi’s graduate stud-nets. An avowed communist, Pontecorvo and his wifeﬂed to America in 1940, and in 1942 he was recruited tothe Manhattan Project’s Montr /C19eal reactor group (MP-2
Ref. 20, and 85below). While there, he conceived semi-
nal ideas regarding neutrino physics, but may have beeninvolved in passing plans for a reactor and a sample ofuranium to a US-based Soviet contact. Pontecorvodefected to Russia from Britain in mid-1950; it has beensuggested that he might have shared a Nobel Prize forhis neutrino theory work had he not defected. Whetheror not he was a spy remains uncertain, but he paid a ter-rible personal and professional cost for what he claimedwas idealism. Is this engaging volume, University ofOxford physicist Frank Close surveys Ponetcorvo’s life
and work. See also Ref. 66. (E)
66.Trinity: The Treachery and Pursuit of the Most
Dangerous Spy in History , F. Close (Penguin, London,
2020). Frank Close continues his examination of atomicspies with this study of the life of Klaus Fuchs, the mem-ber of the British Mission at Los Alamos who passedinformation regarding the implosion design to Russianagents, as well as notes on a 1946 meeting concerningfusion weapons at which he apparently conceived theidea of radiation implosion. He continued to pass infor-mation after moving back to Britain after the war, butwas exposed via deciphered via wartime Russian cables.Close meticulously reconstructs Fuchs’ actions, the leg-work of how his identity was established, and his confes-sion, arrest, and conviction. (E)
67.The Man From the Future: The Visionary Life of
John von Neumann , A. Bhattacharya (W. W. Norton,
New York, 2021). Mathematician John von Neumann is
regarded as one of the most brilliant people to have ever
lived, making contributions to logic, set theory, quantummechanics, game theory applied to economics andnuclear strategy, the ergodic theorem, ballistics, hydro-dynamics of explosions, non-Euclidean geometry, storedprogram computers, and, with his second wife Kl /C19ari,
Monte Carlo simulations; he has been said (along with
501 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 501 04 October 2023 22:53:22
Edward Teller) to have been the inspiration for the 1964
black-comedy ﬁlm Dr. Strangelove directed by Stanley
Kubrick. At Los Alamos, von Neumann was deeplyinvolved in the development of the implosion bomb and
computational efforts (see Ref. 53), and in postwar years
also consulted with the RAND corporation. This detailedbiography explores the life and contributions of thisastonishing intellect. (E)
68.True Genius: The Life and Work of Richard Garwin,
The most inﬂuential scientist you’ve never heard of ,
J. N. Shurkin (Prometheus, Amherst, New York, 2017).A graduate student of Enrico Fermi, Richard Garwinenjoyed a distinguished career as both a scientist and apolicy analyst, with involvement in the initial design ofthe ﬁrst hydrogen bomb, service on the President’sScience Advisory Committee under Presidents Kennedy,Johnson, and Nixon, as a member of the JASONdefemse advisory group, consulting on virtually everynuclear-arms treaty in existence, and contact with manyimportant technological issues of the last half of thetwentieth century. This biography contains several gar-
bled technical descriptions but should be read by anyone
interested in learning about how true patriot-citizen-sci-entists can serve society. (E)
69.General George C. Marshall and the Atomic Bomb ,
F. A. Settle (Praeger, Santa Barbara, CA, 2016). In manyhistories of the Manhattan Project, Army Chief of StaffGeneral George C. Marshall seems a rather remote ﬁg-ure, appearing only in circumstances such as the appoint-ment of Leslie Groves to head the project, meetings ofthe Top Policy Group, and deliberations of the InterimCommittee or at the Potsdam meeting. Settle chronicleshow Marshall was in fact very much on top ofManhattan developments during the war and was a keyplayer in the development of American nuclear strategyduring his postwar positions as Secretary of State andSecretary of Defense. (E)
70.Man of the Hour: James B. Conant, Warrior
Scientist , J. Conant (Simon and Schuster, New York,
2017). This excellent biography of James Conant, direc-
tor of the wartime National Defense ResearchCommittee which ﬁrst oversaw the Manhattan Projectbefore it was transferred to the Army, is written by hisgranddaughter. Conant enjoyed a distinguished career asan organic chemist, President of Harvard University,government science administrator, education administra-tor and reformer, and, after the war, as Ambassador toGermany. (E)
71.Achieving the Rare: Robert F. Christy’s Journey in
Physics and Beyond , I.-J. Christy (World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore, 2013). Robert Christy was one of RobertOppenheimer’s graduate students and ﬁrst recruits toLos Alamos (MP-2, Ref. 63). This engaging volume
written by his widow Juliana is full of intimate detailsabout Christy’s life and career, including his childhood;student days at the University of British Columbia; time
as a graduate student with Oppenheimer (1937–1941);
his two marriages and families; work at Los Alamos onthe “water boiler” reactor and the “Christy core” pluto-nium bomb; his falling-out with Edward Teller over theOppenheimer security hearings; efforts at promotingnuclear non-proliferation and halting atmospherictesting of nuclear weapons; opposition to the StrategicDefense Initiative; and seminal contributions to theunderstanding of pulsating variable stars. Richly illus-
trated with family and career photographs. (E)
72.Sam Goudsmit and the Hunt for Hitler’s Atomic
Bomb , M. van Calmthout, translated by Michael Horn
(Prometheus, Amherst, NY, 2018). Goudsmit will be
familiar to physicists as the co-discoverer (with George
Uhlenbeck) of electron spin, as the scientiﬁc head of theWorld War II Alsos mission which sought to investigate
German progress in the nuclear ﬁeld, and as the foundingeditor of Physical Review Letters; see MP-1, Refs. 99
and102regarding the Alsos mission. This very engaging
biography relates Goudsmit’s upbringing, personal life,emigration to the United States, and overall career.Marred in places by incorrect statements of physics, butthis may be a matter of translation from the originalDutch. (E)
73.Atomic Bill: A Journalist’s Dangerous Ambition in
the Shadow of the Bomb , V. Kiernan (Three Hills,
Ithaca, NY, 2022). William L. Laurence was a New York
Times journalist allowed exclusive access to the
Manhattan Project; see MP-1, Ref. 1. This biography
traces Laurence’s life and career, concentrating on the
latter. Laurence was one of the ﬁrst science journalists,
and after the war he parlayed his Manhattan access intoarticles, book deals, interviews, consultantships, andspeaking tours, often in ways which would now beregarded as serious conﬂicts of interest. Tragically,Laurence tarnished his reputation via his desire for fameand association with powerful personalities. (E)
74. “Physics at Columbia University: The genesis of the
nuclear energy project,” E. Fermi, Phys. Today 8(11),
12–16 (1955). This article is a transcript of a talk givenby Fermi at an American Physical Society meeting heldat Columbia in January 1954 in which he describes theearly days of pile research there. (E)
75. “Reminiscences of the early days of ﬁssion,” H.
Barschall, Phys. Today 40(6), 27–32 (1987). When ﬁs-
sion was discovered, Barschall was a graduate student atPrinceton working on a thesis involving fast neutrons.He and a group of collaborators subsequently made the
ﬁrst measurement of the fast-neutron (2.5 MeV) ﬁssion
cross-section of uranium. Barschall became anAmerican citizen in July 1943, and in September of thatyear moved to Los Alamos, where he later witnessed theTrinity test. This article offers some reminiscences of hisactivities during the wartime period. See also MP-1,Refs. 41and93. (A)
76. “John Wheeler’s H-bomb blues,” A. Wellerstein, Phys.
Today 72(12), 42–51 (2019). In January 1953, John
Wheeler (of the Bohr & Wheeler ﬁssion theory: MP-1,Ref. 123) was deeply involved in the development of
fusion weapons. During an overnight train trip from hishome in Princeton to Washington, DC, Wheeler lostpages from a sensitive document on the fusion program.The document, largely the work of that group’s chief ofstaff, William Borden, was highly critical of the AtomicEnergy Commission, which the authors felt was mis-
managing the program. The documents were never
found. (E)
77. “Enrico Fermi’s discovery of neutron-induced artiﬁcial
radioactivity: A case of emanation from divine provi-dence,” F. Guerra, M. Leone, and N. Robotti, Phys.
Perspect. 22(3), 129–161 (2020). This paper is a com-
panion to MP-2, Refs. 59–61 . In this installment, the
502 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 502 04 October 2023 22:53:22
authors focus on the experimental apparatus used by
Fermi in his discovery of neutron-induced radioactivity,particularly his radon-beryllium neutron sources. (E)
78. “Drama around a wartime Heisenberg letter,” S.
Schwarz, Phys. Perspect. 24(1), 72–92 (2022). Werner
Heisenberg and Carl Friedrich von Weizs €acker were
friends for many decades, but the relationship had its ups
and downs as a consequence of von Weizs €acker’s attrac-
tion to philosophical ideals and National Socialist rhe-
toric. This paper examines the two men’s long
friendship and its vicissitudes, with particular focus on a1943 letter of Heisenberg to his wife which describes his
frustrations with a conversation he had just had with von
Weizs €acker. von Weizs €acker’s pattern of postwar self-
rationalization is also examined. See also Ref. 94and
MP-1 Refs. 110–115 . (E)
79. “Not just boys at via Pansiperna: Women at the Royal
Institute in Rome,” M. Focaccia, Phys. Perspect. 24(2-
3), 154–177 (2022). This paper does not directly concern
the Manhattan Project but has a connection to EnricoFermi. Focaccia reviews the lives and careers of some of
the women who attended the Royal Physics Institute in
Rome from 1881 to 1937; many went on to distinguishedcareers at the Institute and as teachers and chroniclers of
science. The list includes Laura Capon and Ginestra
Giovene, who, respectively, became the wives of Fermiand Eduoardo Amaldi. (E)
80. “Oppenheimer and the cosmos,” V. Trimble, Hist.
Philos. Phys. Newsletter XV(3) 1, 6–12 (2022). This
article describes Oppenheimer’s work in the area ofastrophysics, including his pre-war work with Snyder
and Volkoff on gravitational collapse and post-war
involvement in conferences dealing with topics such as
supernovae, radio sources, and cosmic rays. (E)
E. International wartime programs, allied intelligence,
and the use of the bombs
81.Selected works of Yakov Borisovich Zeldovich.
Volume II: Particles, nuclei, and the Universe ,J .P .
Ostriker (ed.) (Princeton U. P., Princeton, 1993). Most
historiography of the early interpretation and possible
consequences of ﬁssion focuses on events in Europe
and America. The brilliant Soviet physicist Yakov
Zeldovich was also active in this area, but his publica-tons were largely overlooked in the West as they were
in Soviet journals. This volume, an English translation
of a Russian work, reproduces many of Zeldovich’spapers, including ones on the possibility of a fast-
neutron chain reaction in natural uranium (October
1939), slow-neutron chain reactions (including the pre-dictions that heavy water or other moderators and/or
enrichment would be necessary; also October 1939), a
remarkable paper on diffusion analysis of criticality
with particular emphasis on the effects of delayed neu-
trons (March 1940), and an analysis of the process ofﬁssion (June 1940). The papers are co-authored with Y.
Khariton and Y. Zysin. That Zeldovich was cognizant
of contemporary western literature is indicated by thefact that he cites work by Perrin, Peierls, and Bohr and
Wheeler. This volume hard to ﬁnd but is available from
the publisher. See also Ref. 91. (A)82.Atomic Energy in Canada , C. Kennedy (Atomic
Energy of Canada, Ltd., Ottawa, 1956). This /C24100-
page booklet features photographs, schematic draw-
ings, speciﬁcations, and descriptions of early Canadian
reactors (ZEEP, NRX, NRU, NPD), medical-isotope
production facilities, and the Canada-India reactor, as
well as descriptions of the basics of nuclear energy, ﬁs-
sion, and reactor design and operations. This volume is
now probably hard to ﬁnd, but worth a look if you can;in 1956, it sold for one Canadian dollar. (I)
83.Canada’s Nuclear Story , W. Eggleston (Clarke, Irwin
& Co., Toronto, 1965). Canadian contributions to the
Manhattan Project have tended to be overshadowed by
the much more gargantuan American effort. In addition
to serving as an important source of uranium ores (MP-
3, Ref. 29), a very active reactor development group
staffed by British, European, and Canadian scientists
operated under the auspices of the National Research
Council (NRC) of Canada at a site in Montr /C19eal during
the war. The ﬁrst operational reactor outside the United
States, the group’s heavy-water moderated Zero-
Energy Experimental Pile (ZEEP) went critical on the
afternoon of September 5, 1945. Eggleston reviews
both wartime and postwar Canadian nuclear achieve-
ments, including the development of the very success-ful CANDU reactors. (E)
84.Canada Enters the Nuclear Age: A Technical
History of Atomic Energy of Canada Limited ,
Atomic Energy of Canada Limited (McGill-Queen’s
U. P., Montr /C19eal and Kingston, Ontario, 1997). This
technical history of Canadian reactor developments
complements Eggleston’s volume above, with particu-
lar emphasis on the technicalities of the ZEEP, NRX,
NRU, and CANDU heavy-water reactors. Freely avail-
able at https://www.nrc.gov/docs/ML0303/ML03036
0478.pdf . (I)
85.Montr /C19eal and the Bomb , G. Sabourin (Baraka Books,
Montr /C19eal, 2021). This book is an excellent complement
to Ref. 83. Sabourin relates the history of how the
Montr /C19eal laboratory came to be, details of the work
performed there, and biographical information on some
of the lesser-known personalities involved. Illustrated
with photos not available in most Manhattan Project
sources; also contains many useful references. (E).
86.Israel and the Bomb , A. Cohen (Columbia U. P.,
New York, 1998). This book gives a detailed political
history of the Israeli nuclear program from its forma-
tion in the early 1950s to about 1970, focusing on the
evolution of what Cohen terms the “opacity” of the pro-
gram. Particularly interesting is his description of
exchanges between various Israeli Prime Ministers and
United States Presidents. See also MP-3, Ref. 61. (E)
87.The Winter Fortress: The Epic Mission to sabotage
Hitler’s Atomic Bomb , N. Bascomb (Houghton
Mifﬂin Harcourt, Boston, 2016). This book relates the
dramatic stories of commando, bombing, and sabotage
raids conducted from late 1942 through early 1944
directed at denying Germany supplies of heavy water
from the Norsk Hydro plant in Vemork, Norway.
Bascomb deals only minimally with the physics of
nuclear weapons, but the actions of the commandos,resistance cells, and aircrews involved under incredibly
treacherous and difﬁcult conditions serve as a reminder
503 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 503 04 October 2023 22:53:22
of what true heroism is. See also MP-1, Ref. 17, MP-2,
Refs. 75and81, and MP-3, Ref. 64. (E)
88.The Uranium Club: Unearthing the Relics of the
Nazi Nuclear Program , M. E. Hiebert (Chicago
Review Press, Chicago, 2023). During World War II,
German scientists attempted to construct a chain-
reacting pile by suspending two-inch cubes of naturaluranium in a cylinder ﬁlled with heavy water. Over1,000 such cubes were manufactured. This engagingbook relates the history of the German nuclear programand the work of the ALSOS mission, which recoveredthe 600-odd cubes from Werner Heisenberg’s last reac-tor experiment. Most of the cubes are now unaccountedfor; some were seized by Russian forces, and somewere probably used as fuel for the Oak Ridge X-10 andHanford plutonium production piles. About a dozen areknown to exist in various collections around the UnitedStates; the author has been closely involved in tracingdown their fates through interviews and archivalresearch. Includes photos not often seen in other sour-ces. (E)
89.Farm Hall and the German Atomic Project of
World War II: A Dramatic History , D. C. Cassidy
(Springer International, 2017). Cassidy, a well-knownhistorian of 20th-century science, gives a brief historyof the German nuclear program and the Farm Hall tran-scripts, and presents the script of a play dealing withthe latter. See also Ref. 95and MP-1, Refs. 103,104,
106, and 110; MP-2, Refs. 50,75,103, and 124. (E)
90.Taiwan’s Former Nuclear Weapons Program ,D .
Albright and A. Stricker (Institute for Science andInternational Security Press, Washington, DC, 2018).This book describes Taiwan’s secret efforts to acquirenuclear weapons from the 1950s through the 1980s,with the program being shut down by the United Statesin 1988 as the Taiwanese were approaching break-outcapacity. The Taiwanese strategy was to achieve a “hotstandby” capacity under the umbrella of a peacefulnuclear program in order to be able to assemble a few
nuclear weapons if a Chinese invasion appeared immi-
nent. Albright and Stricker close with a chapter on les-sons for today: The importance that reprocessing andenrichment activities be prohibited; use of politicalleverage and alliances to achieve desired outcomes;persistence in pursuing consistent policies informed byknowledgeable people; and the importance of inspec-tions, safeguards, export controls; and informants. (E)
91. “The mechanism of nuclear ﬁssion (Part I),” Y.
Zeldovich and Y. Khariton, Sov. Phys. Usp. 26(3),
266–278 (1983). This paper is an English translation ofa September 1941 paper in which Zeldovich andKhariton review the energetics of ﬁssion in much thesame way as had Bohr and Wheeler in 1939, albeitwith some elaborations, notably speculations on the sta-bility of transuranic elements. Part II [also from 1941;Sov. Phys. Usp. 26(3), 279–294 (1983)] considers the
statistical mechanics of excited nuclei, the differing
behaviors of U-235 and U-238 under neutron bombard-ment, and includes an estimate of the critical mass ofU-235 of about 10 kg. (A)
92. “Getting even with Heisenberg,” N. P. Landsman,
Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. 33(2), 297–325 (2002).
This article is formally a review of Paul Rose’s bookon the German nuclear program and Heisenberg’s rolein it (MP-1, Ref. 107) but gives an excellent overview
of the historiography of the German project to the timeof its writing. (E)
93. “Tracking the journey of a uranium cube,” T. Koeth
and M. Hiebert, Phys. Today 72(5), 36–43 (2019). This
article is an abbreviated version of Ref. 88. Senior
author Tim Koeth possesses two of the German ura-nium cubes; readers who might know of others areencouraged to come forward. (E)
94. “The occupation of Niels Bohr’s Institute: December 6,
1943 - February 3, 1944,” S. Schwarz, Phys. Perspect.
23(1), 49–82 (2021). In December 1943, German Army
police forces occupied the Niels Bohr Institute withoutwarning; Bohr had ﬂed to Sweden in September. Staffmembers were imprisoned and interrogated, but theoccupation seemed disorganized. After a brief visit byan “Expert Commission” which included WernerHeisenberg, the Institute was released without condi-tion on February 3, 1944. Schwarz explores the historyof this footnote to the German occupation of Denmark,suggesting how inﬁghting between various occupation-authority ofﬁces (military, police, civil) could be
involved. (E)
95. In 2022, the German-language journal Berichte zur
Wissenschaftsgeschichte/History of Science andHumanities [vol. 45, issue 1 (2022)] published a seriesof ﬁve English-language papers on Farm Hall by histor-ians of science Dieter Hoffmann, Ryan Dahn, MarkWalker, David Cassidy, and Gerald Holton. These wereoriginally presented at a session of an AmericanPhysical Society meeting held in March 2021 to com-memorate the 75th anniversary of Farm Hall; abstractscan be found at https://meetings.aps.org/Meeting/
MAR21/Session/C62 . (E)
96. “Why Hitler did not have atomic bombs,” M. Popp,
J. Nucl. Eng. 2(1), 9–27 (2021). This paper considers
the German nuclear program via an examination of aFebruary 1942 report to German Army Ordnance(“Heereswaffenamt”), which was authored primarily byKurt Diebner. The only remaining original copy of this
report resides in the archives of the Max Planck
Society. Popp concludes that Werner Heisenberg andthe other members of the “Uranium Club” did not workon nuclear weapons, that Heisenberg felt that doing sowould harm Germany’s military strength, and thatwork on reactors was delayed to avoid securing proofof the possibility of utilizing nuclear energy.Particularly interesting is that a report of a large ﬁssioncross-section for U-235 (3.7 barns) from a Vienneselaboratory was (deliberately?) overlooked as it wouldhave implied a small critical mass. See also Ref. 98.
(E)
97. “A new approach on modeling of the B-VIII, The ulti-
mate achievement of the second ‘Uranverain,’” M. P.Pe/C20sic´, Nucl. Technol. Radiat. Protection 33(1), 1–23
(2023). This paper reports an analysis of the possible
performance of the last German wartime reactor, the
Haigerloch B-VIII heavy-water pile. The author points
out various limitations of an earlier such analysis (MP-2, Ref. 81), particularly in the way the fuel distribution
was modeled. Reﬁned modeling indicates that the pilewas closer to criticality than its inventors thought, withan effective reproduction constant on the order of/C240:95, depending on the choice of model parameters.
504 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 504 04 October 2023 22:53:22
The overall conclusion, however, is that the pile was
subcritical, with the major factor being impurity of theheavy water moderator. (A)
98. “Laboratory life instead of nuclear weapons: A new
perspective on the German uranium club,” C. Forstner,
Phys. Perspect. 24(4), 181–207 (2022). This paper
describes the activities of the Vienna group of theGerman “uranium club” during the war years. For theseresearchers, work carried on much as before the warand with the same instruments and techniques as theyhad already developed for nuclear and radiochemicalresearch except for the focus being on uranium.Measurements of cross-sections, neutron numbers, ﬁs-sion product ranges and energies, and even the possibledetection of plutonium were involved. Unfortunately,Forstner passed away while this paper was in press.Some of his conclusions have been questioned in viewof the Vienna group’s neutron sources being of verybroad energy spectra and that the claimed discovery ofPu does not accord with known alpha-decay energies(M. Popp, private communication). (I)
99. “Science and politics: The discovery of nuclear ﬁssion
75 years ago,” R. L. Sime, Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 526(3-
4), A27–A31 (2014). This article describes how LiseMeitner was written out of the history of the discoveryof ﬁssion by political circumstances in Germany in1938. The author, Ruth Sime, has prepared a deﬁnitivebiography of Meitner (MP-1, Ref. 79) and written sev-
eral papers detailing the circumstances of the discoveryof ﬁssion. (E)
100. “Walther Bothe’s graphite: Physics, impurities, and
blame in the German nuclear program,” B. C. Reed,Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 532(7), 200121 (2020). In early
1941, Walther Bothe and Peter Jensen measured thecross-section for capture of thermal neutrons by graph-ite. Their graphite contained unappreciated impurities,which caused them to report a large capture cross-section. This in turn led ofﬁcials in the German nuclearprogram to reject graphite as a moderating material for
a possible nuclear pile in favor of heavy water, a move
which set their program back irreparably.Unfortunately, Bothe’s reputation came to be tainted bythe affair after the war by his being accused of havingcaused an error which severely damaged the program.This paper, based on a translation of Bothe andJensen’s original 1944 paper, analyses their experimentand results. See also Ref. 101. (A)
101. “Zum unvollendeten ersten deutschen Kernreaktor
1942/1944,” L. Koester, Naturwiss. 67(12), 573–575
(1980). A German-language treatment of Bothe andJensen’s experiment. The title translates as “On theunﬁnished ﬁrst German nuclear reactor 1942/1944.”(A)
102. “Soviet uranium boosters,” R. Mellor, Phys. Today
74(7), 28–35 (2021). This engaging article surveys the
history of uranium prospecting in the Soviet Unionfrom the early 1900’s onward. Despite nominal govern-
ment support which was often derailed by political
upheavals, purges, and the outbreak of World War II, afew dogged scientists and mining engineers pursuedradium and uranium extraction, with the dirty workoften conducted by forced labor. At the end of the war,the Soviets possessed only some 400 tons of uraniumore, far less than the western allies. (E)103. ““Crucial? helpful? practically nil”? Reality and per-
ception of Britain’s contribution to the development ofnuclear weapons during the second World War,” S.Lee, Diplomacy Statecraft 33(1), 19–40 (2022). Similar
to MP-2, Ref. 21(see also Refs. 27and57in that
installment), this paper discusses aspects of cooperationand competition in the Anglo-American nuclear rela-tionship from the perspective of scientiﬁc collaborationand rivalry during the war. (E)
F. Postwar developments
104. The Traveler’s Guide to Nuclear Weapons: A
Journey Through America’s Cold War Battleﬁelds ,
J. M. Maroncelli and T. L. Karpin (Historical OdysseyPublishers, Silverdale, WA, 2002). This CD-basedbook gives a profusely illustrated guide to nuclearweapons complex sites around the United States, frommining operations to weapon test sites. There is a com-panion website at http://www.atomictraveler.com/
index.htm . See also Ref. 106.
105. 100 Suns , M. Light (Knopf, New York, 2003). This
beautifully produced coffee-table book features 100
compelling photographs of aboveground United Statesnuclear tests from 1945 to 1962. Contains detailed cap-tions, a chronology, and an extensive bibliography. Seealso MP-2, Ref. 9. (E)
106. Complex Transformation: Change in the United
States Nuclear Weapons Complex from 1942 to2015 , G. C. Allen (CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, South Carolina, 2016). Thisremarkable book gives a thorough history of the evolu-tion of the United States’ Nuclear Weapons Complex(now properly termed the Nuclear Weapons Enterprise)from its origins in the 1940’s to the present day.Dozens of photographs, organizational charts, tables,graphics, and timelines support the text. (I)
107. The Nuclear Taboo: The United States and the Non-
Use of Nuclear Weapons since 1945 , N. Tannenwald
(Cambridge U. P., Cambridge, 2008). In this book,
Tannenwald advances the thesis that a “nuclear taboo”has arisen around the idea of state-sanctioned use ofnuclear weapons, with such weapons having come tobe considered abhorrent and not legitimate weapons ofwar even if they would be militarily advantageous andinvolve no possibility of in-kind retaliation. For a con-trasting view based on a public opinion survey, see Ref.119. (E)
108. One Physicist’s Guide to Nuclear Weapons: A
global perspective , J. Bernstein (IOP Publishing,
Bristol, 2016). This brief volume reviews the develop-ment of nuclear weapons from the discovery of ﬁssionto the 2016 treaty dealing with Iran’s nuclear program.Bernstein witnessed two above-ground nuclear testsand knew many of the individuals involved in thedevelopment of nuclear weapons, including Robert
Oppenheimer, Edward Teller, and Hans Bethe. (I)
109. Doomed to Cooperate: How American and Russian
Scientists Joined Forces to Avert Some of theGreatest Post-Cold War Nuclear Dangers , Siegfried
S. Hecker, Ed. (Bathtub Row Press, Los Alamos, NewMexico, 2016). This high-quality two-volume workruns to nearly 1,000 pages and offers an account of
505 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 505 04 October 2023 22:53:22
cooperation between American and Russian nuclear-
weapons laboratories from the late 1980s through the1990s as told in articles by and interviews with about100 participants on both sides. Much of the focus is on
how experts from American laboratories and govern-
mental and non-governmental agencies helped theirSoviet counterparts secure nuclear weapons, materials,and facilities following the breakup of the Soviet Unionin late 1991, but there is also coverage of cooperationin non-weapons pure-research areas, many of whichhad civilian applications. Editor Siegfried Hecker is aformer Director of the Los Alamos Laboratory(1986–1997) and was deeply involved in establishingin these efforts. (I)
110. Nuclear Weapons and Related Security Issues ,P .S .
Corden, A. Fainberg, D. W. Hafemeister and A.Macfarlane, eds. (American Institute of PhysicsConference Proceedings # 1898, Maryland, 2017). Thisvolume comprises papers presented at a “Short Course”sponsored by George Washington University’s (GWU)Elliott School of International Affairs, the American
Physical Society’s Forum on Physics and Society, the
GWU Nuclear Science and Security Consortium,the American Association of Physics Teachers, and theFederation of American Scientists which was held atGWU over 21–22 April 2017. Twenty-nine papersreview issues in the areas of strategic nuclear weapons,multilateral arms control, nuclear nonproliferation, andterrorism. This course is one in the same series asdescribed in MP-3, Ref. 83and includes an update of
David Hafemeister’s chronology of Weapons of MassDestruction. (I)
111. The Bomb: Presidents, Generals, and the Secret
History of Nuclear War , F. Kaplan (Simon and
Schuster, New York, 2020). In this sobering volume,Kaplan surveys the nuclear strategies of U. S. adminis-trations from that of Harry Truman up through DonaldTrump. Particularly horrifying is how decades ofStrategic Air Command war plans were predicated on
essentially instantaneous escalation to full-scale use of
thousands of weapons. Presidents now have morelimited-strike options available, but the contradiction ofhaving weapons that can serve only as deterrentsremains. This book should be read by anybody inter-ested in the perverse history of nuclear war-ﬁghtingstrategies. (E)
112. Restricted Data: The History of Nuclear Secrecy in
the United States , A. Wellerstein (University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, 2021). Nuclear secrecy beganwith scientists censoring their own publications soonafter the discovery of ﬁssion, grew into General LeslieGroves’ procedures of compartmentalization and chas-ing down leaks during the Manhattan Project, andbecame bureaucratized with the formation of theAtomic Energy Commission and the concept thatnuclear information was “born secret” as codiﬁed in the
deﬁnition of “Restricted Data” during the development
of the McMahon Act in 1946. Historian of scienceAlex Wellerstein traces the development of the UnitedStates’ nuclear secrecy regime from the early days ofcensorship to the end of the Cold War, describing a sys-tem which has often tied itself in knots in attempting tobalance demands of national security, research, indus-trial development, and foreign relations. (E)113. “Oh, My darling Clementine: A detailed history and
data repository of the Los Alamos plutonium fast reac-tor,” H. K. Patenaude and F. J. Freibert, NuclearTechnology, in press. Clementine was a liquid-mercury
cooled, plutonium and uranium-fueled fast-neutron
reactor developed at Los Alamos just after the end ofthe war, when the Manhattan Engineer District was stillformally in existence. This compact device was ofessentially cubical footprint of about 10-foot sidelength including tamper and shield materials, and oper-ated at 25 kW. Fuel slugs were cylinders about 6 incheslong and 5/8-in. in diameter. Criticality was achievedin September 1946, and the device operated until late1952, when it was shut down due to high alpha activityin the coolant indicative of a fuel rod rupture. Duringits operating life, Clementine generated valuable dataon fast-neutron ﬁssion spectra, cross-sections, liquid-metal cooling, breeding reactions, and materials sci-ence. This paper, which is extensively illustrated withoriginal photos, schematics, and graphs, describes thedesign, construction, operation, and eventual decomis-
sioning of this pioneering experiment. This paper was
in press at the time of this writing, but an online versioncan be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/
10.1080/00295450.2023.2176686 . (A)
114. “Terrorism potential for research reactors compared
with power reactors,” G. Bunn and C. Braun, Am.
Behav. Sci. 46(6), 714–726 (2003). Many industrial,
university, and government-laboratory research reac-tors use highly enriched uranium (HEU). Unlike large-scale power reactors, many of these reactors and theirfuel may not be well-protected, particularly thoselocated at industrial and educational sites. In 1978, bothAmerica and Russia began programs to develop less-enriched fuel for such reactors that they had providedto various countries during postwar “Atoms for Peace”-type programs. Many reactors have been converted, butsome still operate with HEU. In this article, Bunn and
Braun review the research-reactor situation as of 2003,
concluding that these devices could be attractive targetsfor terrorists seeking a supply of HEU that would beboth less radiologically dangerous to handle than spentpower-reactor fuel and being easier to transport. Seealso Ref. 37. (E)
115. “The big science of Stockpile Stewardship,” V. H.
Reis, R. J. Hanrahan, and W. K. Levedahl, Phys. Today69(8), 47–53 (2016). This article summarizes experi-
mental and computational facilities developed underthe auspices of the United States’ science-basedStockpile Stewardship program. (I)
116. “The secret of the Soviet hydrogen bomb,” A.
Wellerstein and E. Geist, Phys. Today 70(4), 40–47
(2017). The ﬁrst Soviet thermonuclear weapon, deto-nated in August 1953, was known to the Soviets asSloika or “layer cake,” and in the West as “Joe-4.” Thisdevice, which had a yield of 400 kilotons, was largely
disparaged by western scientists and political ﬁgures as
not being a “true” thermonuclear bomb of theAmerican Teller-Ulam radiation-implosion design,which was tested in November 1952. In this article, theauthors analyze the Sloika design and argue that it was
an important means for the Soviets to explore thermo-nuclear concepts while still producing deliverableweapons. (E)
506 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 506 04 October 2023 22:53:22
117. “Sakharov, Gorbachev, and nuclear reductions,” F. von
Hippel, Phys. Today 70(4), 49–54 (2017). This article
follows that above by Wellerstein and Geist on theSoviet hydrogen bomb program in the April 2017 edi-
tion of Physics Today . von Hippel describes how com-
ments made by dissident Soviet physicist AndreiSakharov in 1987 helped to set in motion a processwhich resulted in the elimination of thousands ofnuclear-armed ballistic missiles from the stockpiles ofthe United States and the Soviet Union. Sakharov wasinstrumental in convincing Soviet leader MikhailGorbachev to decouple US-Soviet nuclear reductionsfrom discussions of President Ronald Reagan’s “StarWars” ballistic missile defense initiative. (E)
118. “The secret search for Cold War uranium in Morocco.”
M. Adamson, Phys. Today 70(6), 54–60 (2017). In
early 1953, French and American ofﬁcials entered intoa secret alliance to prospect for uranium in Morocco,then a French protectorate. Against a background of ris-ing nationalist violence, surveys were conducted untillate 1955, when the program was suspended. In the
meantime, American interests aimed at being able to
establish air bases were becoming more aligned withMorocco becoming an independent country, whichoccurred in early 1956. Uranium is present in Morocco,but the surveys indicated that deposits were not eco-nomically viable. This article tells the story of thislittle-known aspect of the Cold War. (E)
119. “Revisiting Hiroshima in Iran,” S. D. Sagan and B. A.
Valentino, Int. Security 42(1), 41–79 (2017). This
paper reports the results of a survey of 780 Americansregarding use of nuclear versus conventional weaponsin retaliation against Iran in response to a hypotheticalattack by that country on an American aircraft carrierwhich results in the deaths of as many military person-nel as occurred at Pearl Harbor. The purpose of thissurvey was to test Tannenwald’s theory that the publichas come to adopt a taboo against use of nuclear weap-ons; see Ref. 107. The authors conclude that the major-
ity of the U. S. public has not internalized either a
belief in such a taboo or a strong norm against harm tononcombatants if the result is to lessen American mili-tary casualties. (E)
120. “The rise, collapse, and compaction of Mt. Mantap
from the 3 September 2017 North Korean nuclear test,”T. Wang, Q. Shi, M. Nikkhoo, S. Wei, S. Barbot, D.Dreger, R. B €urgmann, M. Motagh, and Q. Chen,
Science 361(6398), 166–170 (2018). This paper reports
the use of satellite radar imagery of ground displace-ments in combination with seismic data to determinethe yield of a claimed North Korean two-stage thermo-nuclear bomb test on 3 September 2017. The inferredyield is between 171 and 209 kilotons (kt), with a best-ﬁt solution of 191 kt, certainly characteristic of aboosted ﬁssion weapon if not a full-blown thermonu-clear device. (A)
121. “Getting rid of the Swedish bomb,” T. Jonter, Phys.
Today 72(9), 40–47 (2019). Soon after the end of
World War II, Swedish military and political leadersbegan considering whether their country shoulddevelop its own nuclear weapons. Jonter, a professor ofinternational relations at Stockholm University, traceshow internal and external political issues, notably pres-sure form the United States, eventually drove Swedento drop its nuclear aspirations by the mid-1960s.
Sweden then became a strong voice for disarmament.(E)
122. “NSF and postwar US science.” E. Gibson, Physics
Today 73(5), 40–46 (2020). World War II changed the
relationship between science and government.
Proposals for a federal ofﬁce of science and technologymobilization were advanced even before the end of thewar, but it was Vannevar Bush’s July, 1945 Science -
The Endless Frontier report that laid out a proposal for
the creation of a national research foundation. TheNational Science Foundation came into being in 1950,initially with a very meager budget. This articledescribes the early years of the NSF and how its ﬁrstdirector, Alan Waterman, was careful to build thatorganization to be relatively free of bureaucratic inter-ference while maintaining high standards. This articleshould be read by anyone interested in the developmentof national science policies. (E)
123. “Who’s next?” The Economist 438(9230), 16–18
(2021). The Economist often runs well-informedarticles on current scientiﬁc and technological develop-
ments. This article in the 30 January 2021 edition
explores the current state of nuclear proliferation con-cerns, with particular emphasis on potentially destabi-lizing events in East Asia and the Middle East. (E)
124. The October 2020 edition of Health Physics (volume
119, issue (4)) contains six openly available papers pre-
pared by editor Steven Simon and various co-authorsreporting the results of a Congressional commissionestablished to assess the health impacts of the Trinitytest, and, by extension, nuclear detonations in general.Topics covered include dose estimates from fallout,recommended exposures, and procedures for internaland external dose estimates for various fallout products.Freely available at https://journals.lww.com/health-
physics/toc/2020/10000 . (A)
125. On December 16, 2022, U. S. Secretary of Energy
Jennifer Granholm announced that the 1954 AtomicEnergy Commission decision to revoke Robert
Oppenheimer’s security clearance had been vacated, in
part because the AEC failed to follow its own rules.The DoE announcement and a link to Garnholm’s ordercan be found at https://www.energy.gov/articles/secre-
tary-granholm-statement-doe-order-v acating- 1954-
atomic-energy-commission-decision (E)
G. Educational materials
126. Strange Glow: The Story of Radiation , T. Jorgensen
(Princeton, 2016). This very readable volume coversthe history of radiation from the discovery of x-rays tothe present day, with particular emphasis on exposurefrom sources such as fallout, medical treatments, cellphones, food, radon, and nuclear power plants.Jorgensen avoids dry technical language, opting instead
to tell the story of radiation through its human connec-
tions. (E)
127. The Secret Project , Jonah Winter and Jeanette Winter
(Beach Lane Books, New York, 2017) This picturebook for very young children (K-3) tells the story ofhow Los Alamos was turned into a secret bomb-development laboratory; a brief Author’s Note ﬁlls in
507 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 507 04 October 2023 22:53:22
some of the background for parents and teachers unfa-
miliar with the Manhattan Project. This book would
probably serve as a good “primer” before young read-
ers take on Sheinkin’s Bomb: The Race to Build - and
Steal - the World’s Most Dangerous Weapon (MP-3,
Ref. 93). (E)
128. Critical Assembly: Poems of the Manhattan Project ,
J. Canaday (University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque, 2017). Canaday has composed several
dozen poems about the Manhattan Project, puttingthem under the names of people associated with the
Project, including Oppenheimer, Szilard, Teller,
Groves, Bethe, Feynman, and Wigner. This and the fol-
lowing source could serve as reading materials for a lit-
erature class on science and society issues. (E)
129. “A compendium of striking manhattan project quotes,”
B. C. Reed, Hist. Phys. Newsletter XIII(3), 8–14
(2016). A compendium of several dozen thought-
provoking quotes on the Manhattan Project by scien-
tists and others involved with the work. (E)
130. “Nuclear cartography: Patterns in binding energies and
subatomic structure,” E. C. Simpson and M. Shelley,Phys. Educ. 52, 064002 (9 pp) (2017). A summary of
the concepts of mass defect, binding energy, ﬁssion,
fusion, and the chart of the nuclides for high-school stu-
dents. (I)
131. “Uranium ﬁssion and plutonium production in the
undergraduate lab,” J. V. Willigen, C. Loman, P.Thibaudier, D. B. R. A. Fokkema, and T. W. Hijman,
Am. J. Phys. 88(3), 200–206 (2020). This paper
describes an experiment carried out by ﬁrst-year stu-
dents at the University of Amsterdam and Vrije
Universiteit in The Netherlands wherein 15 g ofdepleted uranium (U-238) were bombarded by neutrons
from a Americium-Beryllium neutron source, and the
resulting activation studied by gamma-ray spectros-
copy. The experiment demonstrated both ﬁssion as
detected by emission of gamma-rays from ﬁssion prod-
ucts and also the formation of Pu-239 as detected by
emission of gamma-rays from decaying Np-239. (A)
132. “Estimating the yield of the Trinity test with a simple
kinetic energy analysis,” B. C. Reed, Phys. Educ. 55,
033007 (3 pp) (2020). This brief paper shows how a
high-school-level analysis of the kinetic energy of the
expanding ﬁreball of the Trinity test can be used to
roughly estimate the energy released in the explosion.(I)
133. “Estimating the size of Fermi’s CP-1 nuclear pile: A
classroom approach,” B. C. Reed, Eur. J. Phys. 42,
055801 (12 pp) (2021). This paper uses basic concepts
of cross-sections, neutron mean-free-paths, reproduc-
tion constants, and expressions for estimating the criti-cal size of a self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction to
understand the dimensions of Enrico Fermi’s ﬁrst
nuclear pile. Intended for undergraduates. (I)
134. “Estimating the maximum visual intensity of a nuclear
ﬁreball,” B. C. Reed, Eur. J. Phys. 44(1) 015802 (4 pp)
(2023). Based on data in Glasstone and Dolan’s Effects
of Atomic Weapons volume (MP-1, Ref. 51; updated
1977 edition), this article derives an expression for the
maximum visual intensity of a nuclear ﬁreball as a
function of weapon yield and distance. Yes, nuclear
ﬁreballs can truly be brighter than a thousand suns. (I)135. “The devil’s work: A Maxwell’s demon model for
understanding the work cost of isotope enrichment,” B.
C. Reed, Phys. Soc. 52(1), 1–3 (2023). Formal deriva-
tions of the energy involved in separating isotopes, so-
called “separative work units,” are notoriously compli-
cated. This article provides a simple probability-based
pedagogical model for estimating separative work
based on a Maxwell’s demon-type scenario where the
demon is equipped with a beam balance. The model
gives results in very close accord with more formal der-
ivations, and is suitable for presentation to students
familiar with simple integrals and basic concepts of
probability. (I)
III. VIDEOS AND WEBSITES
136. Manhattan Project. This Wikipedia page gives a thor-
ough and well-referenced survey of the Manhattan
Project. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Manhattan_Project (E)
137. The online Encyclopedia for the History of Science
(ETHOS) is published by Carnegie Mellon University.
This resource is intended for historians of science who
specialize in one topic to have a way to quickly become
familiar with how those in other areas approach their
disciplines. Historian of science Alex Wellerstein
(Refs. 76,112, and 116) has an excellent survey of the
Manhattan Project and its legacy as part of this site; see
https://ethos.lps.library.cmu.edu/article/id/35/ . (I)
138. The U. S. Nuclear Weapons Complex, https://www.
google.com/maps/d/viewer?mid ¼16D-GF2of9UXppS
RknAN_ApFpHBg&ll ¼27.322007519566913\%2C-85.
61426514999994&z ¼2. This interactive map prepared
by Frank Settle, Director of the ALSOS digital library
for nuclear issues (MP-1, Ref. 138), contains the loca-
tions of dozens of important ofﬁces, mines, mills,
plants, laboratories, and test sites that comprised the
U.S. nuclear complex from World War II to 2016.
More information for many of the sites is available in
“The Traveler’s Guide to Nuclear Weapons,” Ref. 104.
Locations can be accessed directly by clicking on their
map pins or selected from sections in the legend on the
left side of the map. The sections are organized to fol-
low the progression of nuclear materials from mining to
weapons testing. A unique color code identiﬁes the
locations in each section. Page numbers in the “Guide”
refer to the Traveler’s Guide referenced above. (E)
139. An interactive isotope app is available on a website of
the American Nuclear Society at isotopes.ans.org .
Developed by students at the University of South
Carolina Aiken, users can select an element from the
periodic table, which brings up a slider bar wherein the
number of neutrons can be adjusted to select a givenisotope. Pictures and captions describe known uses of
the isotope and its decay properties. (E)
140. The Physicists Coalition for Nuclear Threat Reduction
is devoted to mobilizing physical scientists and engi-
neers who are interested in nuclear arms-control policy.
The Coalition is supported by the American Physical
Society and the Carnegie Endowment, and offers collo-
quia, fellowships, and policy and advocacy support.
https://physicistscoalition.org (E)
508 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 508 04 October 2023 22:53:22
141. Nuclear Attack UK Live Broadcast https://www.youtu-
be.com/watch?v ¼exY6l4j12Ng This ﬁctional 36-
minute BBC “Breaking News” segment describes howan incident between Russian and NATO forces in theMediterranean spirals out of control into a nuclearexchange. That the commentary is delivered in theusual understated BBC style adds to the chilling natureof the program. (E)
142. A project at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
is dedicated to digitizing ﬁlms of Los Alamos andLivermore atmospheric nuclear weapons tests. InMarch 2017, the ﬁrst of these declassiﬁed videos wasreleased in an LLNL YouTube Playlist available athttps://www.youtube.com/playlist?list ¼PLvGO_dWo8
VfcmG166wKRy5z-GlJ_OQND5 . Hundreds of videos
of various tests are freely viewable. (E)
143. “A” is for atom. This 1952 short cartoon ( /C2415 min)
sponsored by General Electric charmingly explainsabout atoms, isotopes, nuclear power and explosions,and uses of isotopes in industry and medicine.Available at http://www.atomicheritage.org/tour-stop/
atomic-science#.Wez2sUyZNwA (E)
144. The Japan-US Radiation Effects Research Foundation
was established to study radiation effects in the survi-vors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki; the homepage of thisorganization can be found at http://www.rerf.jp/shared/
ds02/index.html . In their 2022 Dosimetry System anal-
ysis, RERF researchers estimated the yields of theHiroshima and Nagasaki bombs at 16 kt and 21 kt,respectively; see https://www.rerf.or.jp/en/glossary/
ds02-en/ . (I)
145. “Hiroshima 1945—The British atomic attack.” There
was no British atomic attack, but this speculative 15-minute video is worth watching; see also Ref. 146. This
program describes how a squadron of British airmentrained with Lancaster bombers to deliver the productsof the Manhattan Project as a backup in case AmericanB-29 bombers proved unequal to the task. I aminformed by a contact at Los Alamos that their recordsoffer no support for the purported Lancaster training.Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v ¼
5XX9ptCNpik . (E)
146. “Third Atomic Bomb Attack -1945.” This video is a
companion production to that immediately above. Inthis 25-minute program, the complex nature of theJapanese surrender is explored, including the possibil-ity of a military coup which would have resulted in thewar being prolonged, and the possible use of a thirdnuclear weapon, which President Truman was reluctantto authorize. Available at https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v ¼I34pxr23Nhw . (E)
147. Encyclopedia of Nuclear Energy. This extensive online
encyclopedia published by Elsevier comprises dozensof sections written by experts on topics including radio-activity, nuclear weapons, reactor designs and safety,nuclear waste, medical isotopes, radiation protection,and radioisotope power for space applications. https://
www.elsevier.com/books/encyclopedia-of-nuclear-energy/greenspan/978-0-12-819725-7 .( A )148. The Soviet “Tsar Bomba” fusion-bomb explosion of
October 30, 1961 was the most powerful nuclear devicedetonated, producing a yield of 50 megatons. In 2020,
Russian authorities declassiﬁed a 40-minute documentary
about the test. The voice-over is in Russian (completewith dramatic music), but English closed captions can bebrought up by clicking on the CC tab of the video. https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v ¼XJhZ3i-HXS0 (E)
149. On A ugust 8, 1945, between the bombings of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, Russia declared war on Japan. A briefYouTube video shows an image of a teletype printoutreporting President Truman announcing the news. The
printout was saved by a Brooklyn radio station owner.
https://www. youtube.com/watch?v ¼ML5_VE5-1HQ (E)
150. A BBC-produced seven-episode podcast on the devel-
opment and use of the bomb focusing on Leo Szilard’s
role was broadcast during the Summer and Fall of
2020; available for download at https://www.bbc.co.uk/
programmes/p08llv8n/episodes/downloads . (E)
151. In Our Time: The Manhattan Project. This 48-minute
BBC4 radio program aired on October 7, 2021. In a
round-table format with this author, Cynthia Kelly of
the Atomic Heritage Foundation, and theoretical physi-cist Frank Close of Oxford University, interviewerMelvyn Bragg explored how the discovery of ﬁssion
led to the fear of Germany acquiring atomic bombs and
the consequent Allied program. Available at https://
www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/m00108h1 . (E)
152. Oppenheimer . This biographical movie directed by
acclaimed ﬁlmmaker Christoper Nolan is scheduled for
theatrical release in July 2023 in IMAX, 70 mm, and
35 mm formats. The ﬁlm features a high-proﬁle castand is based on Bird and Sherwin’s American
Prometheus (MP-1, Ref. 64). A website can be found at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oppenheimer_(ﬁlm) . (E)
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like thank John Altholz, Michael Attas,
Jeremy Bernstein, David Cassidy, Mark Chadwick, JohnCoster-Mullen (deceased), Cassiano Endre de Oliveira,Miriam Focaccia, Dick Groves, Bob Hayward, Miriam
Hiebert, Stan Norris, Patrick Park, Mike Pearson, Manfred
Popp, Tom Semkow, Frank Settle, Ruth Sime, Roger
Stuewer (deceased) Mark Walker, Alex Wellerstein, and
Pete Zimmerman (deceased) for bringing various sources to
my attention, providing me with copies of papers, andoffering numerous suggestions and comments. The authoralso thanks three anonymous reviewers for suggestions and
corrections which helped improve this paper.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂicts to declare.
a)ORCID: 0000-0003-2032-1955.
509 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 7, July 2023 B. Cameron Reed 509 04 October 2023 22:53:22
