
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkRESOURCE LETTERS| MAY 01 2022
Resource Letter MDS-1: Mobile devices and sensors for
physics teaching 
Martín Monteiro ; Arturo C. Martí
Am. J. Phys.  90, 328–343 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0073317 04 October 2023 23:08:03
RESOURCE LETTER
Resource Letters are guides for college and university physicists, astronomers, and other scientists to literature, websites, and other teaching a ids.
Each Resource Letter focuses on a particular topic and is intended to help teachers improve course content in a speciﬁc ﬁeld of physics or tointroduce nonspecialists to this ﬁeld. The Resource Letters Editorial Board meets annually to choose topics for which Resource Letters will be
commissioned during the ensuing year. Items in the Resource Letter below are labeled with the letter E to indicate elementary level or material of
general interest to persons seeking to become informed in the ﬁeld, the letter I to indicate intermediate level or somewhat specialized material, or t he
letter A to indicate advanced or specialized material. No Resource Letter is meant to be exhaustive and complete; in time there may be more than one
Resource Letter on a given subject. A complete list by ﬁeld of all Resource Letters published to date is at the website <http://ajp.dickinson.edu/
Readers/resLetters.html >. Suggestions for future Resource Letters, including those of high pedagogical value, are welcome and should be sent to
Professor Mario Belloni, Editor, AJP Resource Letters, Davidson College, Department of Physics, Box 6910, Davidson, NC 28035; e-mail:mabelloni@davidson.edu.
Resource Letter MDS-1: Mobile devices and sensors
for physics teaching
Mart /C19ınMonteiro
Universidad ORT Uruguay, Mercedes 1451, Montevideo 11100, Uruguay
Arturo C. Mart /C19ıa)
Instituto de F /C19ısica, Universidad de la Rep /C19ublica, Igu /C19a 4225, Montevideo 11200, Uruguay
(Received 29 September 2021; accepted 31 January 2022)
This Resource Letter provides a guide to the literature on teaching experimental physics using
sensors in tablets, smartphones, and some specialized devices. After a general discussion of
hardware (sensors) and software (apps), we present resources for experiments using mobile-device
sensors in many areas of physics education: mechanics, oscillations and waves, optics,electromagnetism, matter, modern physics, and astronomy.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0073317
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been a revolution in the use of cell
phones. In the late 2000s, smartphones appeared in the market
and quickly became extremely popular: About 1 :5/C2109
smartphones were sold in 2020, and the vast majority of phys-
ics students around the world have access to a smartphone.
Smartphones can be a useful experimental tool not only
because they have a relatively powerful processor and canaccess wireless networks but also due to the presence of a
number of built-in sensors (see Table I). Sensors can deter-
mine the orientation of the device, disable the touch screen,
adjust the display’s brightness according to external condi-
tions to save the battery, geolocate the device, monitor theuser’s heart rate, and unlock the device. The set of sensors
included in mobile devices is large and is expected to expand
in the coming years.
The relevance of the sensors goes far beyond those every-
day uses mentioned: In recent years, numerous educational
and scientiﬁc applications have been proposed, includingphysics experiments. As the original intention of sensor man-
ufacturers was not to use these sensors in science or physics
experiments, some effort is needed to transform smartphones
into scientiﬁc instruments. However, the reward for making
this effort is considerable. Even mid-range smartphonesincorporate a broad range of sensors that would otherwise be
difﬁcult to acquire. Since most students already have such a
device, they can be combined with easily available equip-
ment and materials to create a low-cost, compact, multi-
sensor experimental platform with no need for complicatedconnections or setup. Another factor, less objective, is that
students do not consider a smartphone to be a strange or
magical device, since it is part of their daily lives. Whether
or not this fact inﬂuences the learning process is still under
examination.
We might compare smartphones to devices designed spe-
ciﬁcally for the use of instructional laboratory experiments
in physics and science, including the SmartCart
VR(Pasco),
PocketLabVR(Myriad Sensors, Inc.), IOLabVR(MacMillan),
and Go DirectVRSensor Cart (Vernier). These devices share
some capabilities with smartphones but do not offer the tra-
ditional phone functions. In these devices, the selection ofsensors, the connectivity, and the software have been
designed for pedagogy with student-friendly interfaces.
However, these devices are still alien to the student’s experi-ence, as compared to a smartphone. In addition, these devi-
ces must be purchased speciﬁcally for the physics
laboratory, as students will not already own them. There alsoexist several platforms, such as Arduino or BBC mibro:bit
(see Refs. 5,12,14,15, and 16below), that have been
adapted to perform experiments using sensors. Unlike smart-phones in which the set of sensors is predetermined by the
manufacturers, these programmable boards allow one to
choose from a wide range of sensors and modules includingultrasound sensors, ﬂame detectors, infra-red emitters and
receptors, water level sensors, relays, PIR (Passive infra-
red), and metal detectors. We have included a few articlesusing Arduino boards as examples of experiments that could
be accomplished using a combination of Arduino boards and
smartphones.
328 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 328 04 October 2023 23:08:03
Communication with sensors requires speciﬁc software,
known as an app, specially designed to be executed by the
mobile device. Since most of the mobile devices currently
used are based on two operating systems, iOS and Android,
we will discuss the most useful apps running in these operat-
ing systems, but many others also may be useful in speciﬁccircumstances.
This Resource Letter is aimed at physicists and scientists
interested in adapting or performing experiments using
mobile-device sensors to collect real physical data. Other
potential uses of the mobile devices in the classroom, such
as accessing the internet, sharing data among students, inter-
acting with teachers, clicker-like activities, simulations,
among many others, are not considered here. Video analysis
of physical phenomena, which has received a lot of attention
in the recent decades, is also not included in this ResourceLetter. In the selection of references, preference has been
given to papers in which the experiments can be performed
using state-of-the-art software and hardware. Within the
selection criteria, we prioritized articles published in
journals—but we also cite some of the few books already
published—that present experiments with sufﬁcient detail
and clarity that they will be straightforward to implement ina classroom.
The organization of this Resource Letter is as follows. As
the topic is relatively new, there are only a few books thatare cited in Sec. II. After that, resources about hardware and
useful apps (software) are discussed. Next, we focus on
experiments, starting with references covering multiple
ﬁelds’ topics and then focusing on speciﬁc ﬁelds (mechanics,
oscillations and waves, optics, electromagnetism, matter,
modern physics, and astronomy). Finally, we discuss citizen
science, educational proposals, and impact in PhysicsEducation Research (PER).
II. BASIC RESOURCES
A. Journals and special issues
The recent literature addressing physics experiments using
smartphone and mobile-device sensors in physics issubstantial. Since 2011, hundreds of journal papers have
been published. Most of the articles cited in this ResourceLetter have been published in the following journals:
American Journal of Physics: https://aapt.scitation.org/
journal/ajp
European Journal of Physics: https://iopscience.iop.org/
journal/0143-0807
Physics Education: https://iopscience.iop.org/journal/
0031-9120
Revista Brasileira de Ensino de F /C19ısica: http://www.sbﬁsica.
org.br/rbef/
The Physics Teacher: https://aapt.scitation.org/journal/pte
It is worth highlighting that the regular column,
iPhysicsLab , has been published monthly in The Physics
Teacher since 2012. Also, the Papers in Physics journal pub-
lished a Focus Series on Low-cost Experiments in Physics
using recent technologies as sensors or open source hard-ware, located at https://www.papersinphysics.org/papersin
physics/lowcostexperimentsinphysics . Another mini review
worth mentioning was published by J. Stoop, New ways to
use smartphones for science, J. Stoop (Elsevier Connect,2017) located at: https://www.elsevier.com/connect/new-
ways-to-use-smartphones-for-science . This virtual special
issue from Elsevier is a must-read ensemble of papers previ-ously published in journals. It includes resources in citizen
science relatively accessible to the public, covering topics
such as environment, health, space, smart cities, and society.Emphasis is given to experiments or measurements that can
be conducted by the public following collaborative or
crowd-sourcing methodologies.
B. Books, eBooks, and internet resources
The following references are suitable choices for an intro-
ductory approach to the use of a smartphone sensor in thephysics laboratories.
1.Kinematic Labs with Mobile Devices , J. M. Kinser
(Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2015). DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1088/978-1-6270-5628-1 . This book (alsoTable I. Commonly used sensors.
Abbreviation Sensor Type Quantity Magnitude provided Basic purpose
Ac Accelerometer Sensor Vector Apparent acceleration Rotate screen
LAc Linear
accelerometersPseudosensor (a device that
incorporates inputs from
more than one sensor and
after performing some calcu-
lations returns another
magnitude)Vector Apparent acceleration minus
gravitational accelerationDetect motion
Gy Gyroscope Sensor Vector Angular velocity Device’s orientation
Mi Microphone Sensor Scalar Sound CommunicationCa Camera Sensor Matrix Images Take picturesProx Proximeter Sensor Boolean Near object detected Disable the screenLi Light Sensor Scalar Ambient light Control display brightnessPr Pressure Sensor Scalar Atmospheric pressure Indoor and outdoor height locationOr Orientation Pseudosensor Three angles Around X axis (Pitch)
Around Y axis (Roll) Around
Z axis (Azimuth)Device’s orientation
GPS GPS Receptor Location Geographical location Location
Ma Magnetometer Sensor Vector Local magnetic ﬁeld Device’s orientation
329 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 329 04 October 2023 23:08:03
available as an eBook) presents a comprehensible intro-
duction to the use of smartphone sensors by ﬁrst-year stu-
dents at home or in places where laboratories are not
easily accessible. It presents 13 experiments requiring
only a smartphone and widely available equipment and
also includes a brief overview of typical sensors and data
analysis using typical apps and PC software. (I)
2.iStage 2: Smartphones in Science Teaching , edited by
U. H €ansler, S. Schlunk, and J. Schulze (Science on Stage
Deutschland e.V., Germany, 2014). Published by the
Science on Stage Europe group ( https://www.science-on-
stage.eu/ ), it offers an introduction to the use of smart-
phones and a dozen simple experiments aimed at
secondary-school teachers in mathematics, physics, chem-
istry, and biology. A free download available in German
and English from this link: https://www.science-on-
stage.eu/smartphones . (E)
3.Mobile Device Models , W. Christian, C. Countryman,
and F. Esquembre. This internet website https://
www.compadre.org/books/?ID ¼49&FID ¼45990 hosted
by the AAPT project ComPADRE, emerged from the
popular computer-generated Physlet (Physics content
simulated with Java app lets) animations and provides
Easy Java simulations, problems, and lectures designed to
demonstrate physical concepts involving sensors and
mobile devices. It is especially devoted to the use of the
accelerometer for experiments with inclines, pendulums,
and rolling bodies. As accelerometers do not directly
measure acceleration, but instead measure forces, the sim-
ulation of spring-accelerometers is useful to discuss these
differences. This site provides not only the simulations
but also learning objectives, exercises, and resources. (E)
4.Amusement Park Science: An AAPT Digi Kit, C. Hall
and R. Vieyra. The site https://www.compadre.org/books/
AmusementPark , also hosted by the AAPT project
ComPADRE, is aimed at experimenting with motion and
forces in amusement park rides. It proposes several activi-
ties related to circular motion and roller coasters and dis-
cusses pedagogical aspects of the implementation. (E)
5.Physics Experiments with Arduino and Smartphones ,G .
Organtini (Undergraduate Text in Physics, Springer,
2021). Focused on experimental design, data acquisition,
and processing at the intersection of Arduino and smart-
phone sensors, it discusses several experiments, especially
in mechanics. Programming skills involving PYTHON ,C,
and data visualization are recommended. (A)
6.Smartphones as Mobile Minilabs in Physics ,e d i t e db yJ .
Kuhn and P. Vogt (Springer, 2021). This edited volume fea-tures more than 70 examples from 10 years of the
iPhysicsLabs column of The Physics Teacher journal. (I)
III. HARDWARE
In Table I, we list the most common smartphone sensors
and their main characteristics. This Resource Letter is not
focused speciﬁcally on the hardware; however, there are
many important aspects that should be considered when
designing an experiment with these sensors. Perhaps, the
most obvious fact is the existence of quantities of different
physical characteristics. For example, there are sensors that
measure scalar quantities, such as the ambient light sensor
and the microphone, and sensors that measure vector quanti-
ties, such as the accelerometer and magnetometer. Othersensors are more difﬁcult to classify such as the proximity
sensor, on-off sensor, camera (which provides a single or aset of frames), or GPS (for geographical location). In thecase of vector quantities, it is of importance to highlight that
the axis refers to a system attached to the device. The orien-
tation of the axis corresponds to the principal axis of a rect-angular box (Fig. 1).
The precise location of the sensor inside the device could
also be important in many experiments. In some cases, thelocation of a sensor is rather obvious: The ambient light sen-sor can be located simply by moving a ﬁnger back and forthabove the device while watching the reading on the sensor.The magnetometer can be approximately located by scan-
ning the device with a small magnet and watching the mag-
nitude of the magnetic ﬁeld detected. The precise location ofthe accelerometer is frequently needed but is difﬁcult to ﬁnd;one of the papers below describes a process for locating it.
Below, we provide a list of articles published in the phys-
ics literature that discuss the function of the sensors. In addi-tion to the physics literature, there are also severalengineering journals focused speciﬁcally on sensors, includ-ing electronics and data processing
7. “Familiarizing students with the basics of a smart-
phone’s internal sensors,” C. L. Countryman, Phys.
Teach. 52(9), 557–559 (2014). This paper provides a
basic description of the functioning of micro electrome-
chanical systems (MEMS) and accelerometers, discusses
the orientation of the smartphone’s axes, and, based onthe ball-and-spring model, shows that accelerometersare, in fact, force sensors. (I)
8. “Gamiﬁed physics challenges for teachers and the pub-
lic,” R. Vieyra, C. Vieyra, A. M. Pendrill, and B. Xu,Phys. Educ. 55(4), 045014 (2020). This paper describes
the Physics Toolbox Play, a “gamiﬁed” component of
the Android Physics Toolbox Sensor Suite app dedicatedto introducing fundamental physics principles to childrenand discusses pedagogical aspects of the implementationof the approach with students and teachers of differenteducational levels. (E)
Fig. 1. Standard coordinate system of a smartphone and the orientation
angles.
330 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 330 04 October 2023 23:08:03
9. “Understanding the gyroscope sensor: A quick guide to
teaching rotation movements using a smartphone,” V. L.B. de Jesus, C. A. C. P /C19erez, A. L. de Oliveira, and D. G.
G. Sasaki, Phys. Educ. 54, 015003 (2018). Using a sim-
ple setup consisting of a smartphone mounted on a turn-
table, this paper gives a quick overview of the use of thegyroscope sensor, explains how to interpret data of thethree components of angular velocity, and discusses howto encourage teachers to incorporate smartphone sensors,especially in high schools and undergraduate physics. (I)
10. “Smartphone audio port data collection cookbook,” K.
Forinash and R. Wisman, Pap. Phys. 10, 100006 (2018).
The audio port present in many mobile devices can betransformed to accurately measure a variety of othermagnitude sources such as voltage, external temperature,or accurate timing of moving objects. This paper pro-vides technical details on how to use the audio port tosense external phenomena. (A)
11. “On the determination of accelerometer positions within
host devices,” C. I. Larnder and B. Larade, Am. J. Phys.
87(2), 130–135 (2019). The precise location of the accel-
erometer within the device is an important input in sev-
eral experiments. An experimental method to determine
the accelerometer position is also discussed here. (I, A)
12. “Arduino-based data acquisition into Excel, LabVIEW,
and MATLAB,” D. Nichols, Phys. Teach. 55, 226
(2017). Arduino tools are rather primitive for plottingdata, but this article shows how to acquire data by meansof Arduino-compatible sensors and then analyze it withpopular (although non-free) software packages such as
EXCEL , LabVIEW, or MATLAB . (I, A)
13. “Open-source sensors system for doing simple physics
experiments,” C. Llamas-Bello, J. Vegas, M. A.Gonz /C19alez-Rebollo, and M. A. Gonz /C19alez-Delgado, Pap.
Phys. 10, 100004 (2018). This paper describes an eco-
nomical alternative to commercial platforms that allowsinterfacing sensors with a personal computer. The GitHubrepository also allows collaboration between users thatcan add new characteristics to the platform. (I, A)
14. “Improving students’ skills in physics and computer sci-
ence using BBC Micro:bit,” A. Teiermayer, Phys. Educ.
54(6), 065021 (2019). The BBC Micro:bit is a program-
mable board that is less powerful than Arduino boardsbut simpler to program and includes several built-in sen-sors. Several activities are proposed in this article, rang-ing from measuring the statistic friction coefﬁcient of ablock to measuring the Planck constant using LEDs. (E)
15. “Arduino-smartphone device as a physical phenomena
measurer,” S. Varela-Ballesta, R. Saez, J. Iglesias, andA. Vernet, Phys. Teach. 58(9), 663–665 (2020). Popular
Arduino sensors can be interfaced with smartphonesusing a small piece of hardware, allowing, for example,an experiment about electromagnetic induction in whichthe smartphone is turned into a simple oscilloscope. Thisarticle explores many novel experiments that make useof the expanded range of sensors available to theArduino platform. (I)
16. “Enhance your smartphone with a Bluetooth Arduino
nano board,” F. Bouquet, G. Creutzer, D. Dorsel, J.
Vince, and J. Bobroff, Phys. Educ. 57(1), 015015 (2022).
The Arduino can easily be linked with the smartphoneusing Bluetooth, enabling a range of new experiments.
17. “Implementing Raspberry Pi 3 and Python in the physics
laboratory,” A. Mart /C19ınez, C. Nieves, and A. R /C19ua,Phys.Teach. 59(2), 134–135 (2021). A project to measure the
acceleration of falling objects is developed as an easyexample of use of a low-cost Raspberry Pi 3 computer asan experimental tool. (I)
IV. USEFUL APPS
There are many apps in the digital app stores designed to
interact with the sensors. Several of them propose lessonplans in their web sites. In Table II, we display some of them
we found particularly useful and their main characteristics.We highlight Androsensor, Phyphox, and Physics ToolboxSuite for their multiplatform character, abilities to downloadﬁles to the cloud, set up the sampling frequencies, documen-tation, and support availability.
18. “Advanced tools for smartphone-based experiments:
phyphox,” S. Staacks, S. Hutz, H. Heinke, and C.Stampfer, Phys. Educ. 53(4), 045009 (2018). Phyphox
was speciﬁcally designed to improve the usefulness ofsmartphones in a wide range of physics experiments, andthis paper describes some of its features includingremote access, data analysis, and web-based programma-ble customization. (I)
19. “Phyphox app in the physics classroom,” R. Carroll and
J. Lincoln, Phys. Teach. 58(8), 606–607 (2020). The
“technology in the classroom” column of The Physics
Teacher journal reviews the main characteristics of phy-
phox and discusses some of the “ready-to-go” experi-ments proposed. (I)
V. GENERAL EXPERIMENTS
The following references cover a broad range of physics
topics and are organized in the way that introductory coursesare taught.
20. “Science in your pocket,” R. F. Wisman and K.
Forinash, Int. J. Hands- Sci. 1(1), 7–14 (2008). http://
www.ijhsci.info/wp-content/uploads/2008/09/IJHSCI_volume1_numero1_2008_online.pdf . This paper
makes the analogy between smartphones and Swiss-army (or a multi-tool pocket) knives as useful tools formultiple everyday tasks such as measuring accelera-
tion, analyzing sound, or even performing fast-Fouriertransforms (FFT). (I)
21. “Mobile science,” R. Wisman and K. Forinash,
Ubiquitous Learn. 3(1), 21–34 (2010). Students can col-
lect and analyze experimental data in several setups
using not only the accelerometer but also sound and data
inputs, touch screens, vibration detection, GPS, andmagnetometers. (E)
22. “Applications and examples of experiments with mobile
phones and smartphones in physics lessons,” J. Kuhnand P. Vogt, Front. Sens. 1(4), 67–73 (2013). Available
at:https://ia802908.us.archive.org/13/items/FS3499/
FS3499.pdf . This paper describes three experiments that
require a minimum of equipment: (a) production of anacoustic beat using the loudspeakers of two smartphones,(b) determination of the acceleration of gravity by meansof the Doppler shift of a falling smartphone, and (c)detecting infrared radiation from a remote control withthe smartphone camera to demonstrate interesting dif-fraction phenomena. (E)
331 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 331 04 October 2023 23:08:03
23. “Five challenges that use mobile devices to collect and
analyze data in physics,” R. Vieyra, C. Vieyra, P.Jeanjacquot, A. Mart /C19ı, and M. Monteiro, Sci. Teach.
82(9), 32–40 (2015). The ﬁve challenges presented in
this paper are designed to help high school students
overcome common misconceptions about force and
motion. They include measuring gravitational accelera-
tion at home, analyzing the forces in an elevator, build-
ing a simple Atwood machine, measuring the centripetalacceleration while dancing, and locating the accelerome-
ter inside a smartphone using a turntable. Each of the
activities is related to instructional outcomes present in
the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). (E)
24. “Teaching physics with a local positioning system,” C.
Siebert, P. R. DeStefano, and R. Widenhorn, Phys.
Teach. 57(6), 428–429 (2019). Local positioning sys-
tems (LPS) are local versions of the well-known Global
Positioning System (GPS) with many industrial and com-
mercial applications. LPSs are composed of mobile devi-
ces (known as “tags”) that can be tracked by means of
stationary devices (referred to as “anchors”). This article
shows how to track an object, for instance, an ArborScientiﬁc air-powered projectile carrying a “tag.” This
two-dimensional version works with distance scales ofseveral meters and has uncertainties of about 610 cm.
The results are compared with those obtained using othersensors such as the accelerometer, magnetometer, and
gyroscope of a smartphone, offering the possibility of
several interesting discussions. (I)
25. “Time measurements with a mobile device using sound,”
R. F. Wisman, G. Spahn, and K. Forinash, Phys. Educ.
53(3), 035012 (2018). The precise determination of time
intervals by means of the smartphone microphone ena-bles experiments including (a) comparing the free fall
time of two balls with different initial horizontal veloc-
ity, (b) obtaining the coefﬁcient of restitution of a bounc-ing object, (c) measuring the Doppler shift of asmartphone carried in a cyclist’s pocket, and (d) measur-ing human reaction time. (I)
26. “Using mobile-device sensors to teach students error
analysis,” M. Monteiro, C. Stari, C. Cabeza, and A. C.
Mart/C19ı,Am. J. Phys. 89(5), 477–481 (2021). In contrast
with most of the experiments using smartphones whichuse the mean value of the measurements taken by theTable II. Useful general-purpose apps and their main characteristics.
Name and website Sensors OS Setup Documentation and support Other
Androsensor
http://www.ﬁvasim.comAlmost all Android Yes Commercial adds could be
annoying for the user.A simple but powerful app to record
raw data, mainly to be exported to a
personal computer. Allows recording
background data or while the display
is turned off.
Phyphox
https://phyphox.orgAlmost all internal
and externaliOS and Android /C1/C1/C1 Many packaged experiments
are available, and a collabo-
rative website offers the pos-
sibility of designing
(programming) new
experimentsHighly conﬁgurable app, provides
the possibility of sharing screenshots,
download a csvdata ﬁle, remote con-
trolled operation from a computer,
and acquire data from external
sensors.
Physics Toolbox Suite
https://www.vieyrasoftware.net/Almost all iOS and Android /C1/C1/C1 The website offers an exten-
sive
list of quick experiments and
other educational apps (like
Magna-AR) and games aimed
at primary school and sec-
ondary students in STEM
areasA conﬁgurable app, provides the pos-
sibility of sharing screenshots or
downloading a csvdata ﬁle.
Arduino Science Journal
https://science-journal.arduino.cc/Almost all internal
and externalIOS and Android /C1/C1/C1 Former Science Journal or
Google Science Journal. The
web has a useful guided col-
lection of science lessons
suited for grades Pre-K to
12þA good-looking interface to collect
numerical or graphical data from
internal or external sensors (from
Arduino or other boards)
Sensor Kinetics
https://www.innoventions.com/Almost all iOS and Android /C1/C1/C1 /C1/C1/C1 A simple app to read data on the
screen or to record data to be
exported to a personal computer.
Pasco SPARKvue
https://www.pasco.com/
downloads/sparkvueInternal accelerometer
and many external sensorsiOS and Android /C1/C1/C1 /C1/C1/C1 One of the few tools to analyze data
on a mobile device. Despite being
designed to work with external sen-
sors, it also allows working with the
internal accelerometer of the smart-
phone or tablet.
Magna-AR
https://www.vieyrasoftware.net/Magnetometer iOS and Android /C1/C1/C1 By the same developers as
Physics Toolbox Suite
devoted to experiment with
augmented realityOffers the possibility to visualize the
magnetic ﬁeld in simple setups.
332 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 332 04 October 2023 23:08:03
sensors, this article focuses on the role of the ﬂuctuations
detected by the sensors. It shows how to use smartphone
sensors to teach fundamental concepts in error analysissuch as the physical meaning of the mean value andstandard deviation and the interpretation of histogramsand distributions. Applications to everyday situations are
described, such as evaluating the steadiness of the device
placed on a table or held in different ways and measur-ing the smoothness of a road. (I, A)
VI. MECHANICS
Since accelerometers were one of the ﬁrst sensors to be
repurposed for experimentation, classical mechanics is thediscipline that has received most attention. In addition, in awide range of situations, the microphone can be used as astopwatch to accurately measure time intervals between
sounds. Another sensor that can be useful in classical
mechanics is the ambient light sensor that can be turned intoa distance sensor after suitable calibration. This section isdevoted to experiments in classical mechanics (see also
Refs. 20–25 ).
27. “Determining ball velocities with smartphones,” P.
Vogt, J. Kuhn, and D. Neuschwander, Phys. Teach.
52(6), 376–377 (2014). Using the sounds that result from
kicking sport balls against a wall, the average ball veloc-ity is obtained from the distance. This experiment gives
students the opportunity not only to interpret the sound
signals and extract information about distances andspeeds but also to incorporate error analysis and statis-tics. (E)
28. “Finding the average speed of a light-emitting toy car
with a smartphone light sensor,” S. Kapucu, Phys. Educ.
52(4), 045001 (2017). Transforming the smartphone
ambient light sensor to a distance sensor allows mea-surement of the average speed of a light-emitting object
moving along a line perpendicular to the light sensor,
using a darkened room to determine the relationshipbetween the illumination registered by the sensor and thedistance. The measurement of a simple magnitude, the
distance, could be an opportunity to discuss important
photometric concepts. (I)
29. “Analyzing free fall with a smartphone acceleration
sensor,” P. Vogt and J. Kuhn, Phys. Teach. 50(3),
182–183 (2012). A smartphone can serve both as a fall-
ing body and as an accelerometer to measure the free-
fall time and obtain the gravitational acceleration. (E)
30. “Finding the acceleration and speed of a light-emitting
object on an inclined plane with a smartphone lightsensor,” S. Kapucu, Phys. Educ. 52(5), 055003 (2017).
A modern version of the famous inclined plane experi-
ment performed by Galileo: A light-emitting object
instead a steel ball rolls down the plane and the light sen-sor serves as a ruler. The results are compared to thoseobtained by the analysis of video recordings. (E)
31. “Measurement of gusing a magnetic pendulum and a
smartphone magnetometer,” U. Pili, R. Violanda, and C.
Ceniza, Phys. Teach. 57(5), 258–259 (2018). A small
magnet glued to the bob of a simple pendulum generatesa signal registered with a smartphone’s magnetic ﬁeld
sensor. Looking at this signal, the period can be mea-
sured and thus, varying the length, it is possible to obtainan accurate measurement of the gravitational accelera-
tion. (E)
32. “Determination of aerodynamic drag coefﬁcients using a
drop test with a wireless accelerometer and its applica-tion to model rockets,” S. Pettersson Fors and C. Nord,
Am. J. Phys. 87(9), 714–719 (2019). An effective (and
less expensive) alternative to wind tunnels: aerodynamicdrag coefﬁcients can be determined by dropping modelrockets from heights of a dozen meters. The drag coefﬁ-cient is modeled and compared with reference valuesavailable in the literature. (A)
33. “Determination of the drag resistance coefﬁcients of dif-
ferent vehicles,” C. Fahsl and P. Vogt. Phys. Teach.
56(5), 324–325 (2018). This paper presents an outdoor
experiment to measure the drag coefﬁcient of differentvehicles, such as a bicycle, car, or ﬁre engine, using theacceleration sensor of a smartphone or tablet.Experimental values can be compared with referencevalues found in the literature. The impact of drag onenergy dissipation and power consumption is also ana-lyzed. (I)
34. “An experiment of relative velocity in a train using a
smartphone,” A. Priyanto, Y. Aji, and M. P. Aji, Phys.
Teach. 58(1), 72–73 (2020). Relative motion of near and
distant objects, as seen from a train, is analyzed with asmartphone’s camera and an app, VidAnalysis , that can
perform video analysis to obtain the speed of objects intwo different frames of reference. (E)
35. “Sports, smartphones, and simulation as an engaging
method to teach projectile motion incorporating airresistance,” E. Azhikannickal, Phys. Teach. 57(5),
308–311 (2019). An app tracks the trajectory of a sportsprojectile in real time so that it can be compared withnumerical and theoretical models of the trajectory of theprojectile, taking into account the drag force. (I)
36. “Angular velocity and centripetal acceleration
relationship,” M. Monteiro, C. Cabeza, A. C. Mart /C19ı, P.
Vogt, and J. Kuhn, Phys. Teach. 52(5), 312–313 (2014).
One of the advantages of smartphones is the possibilityof using more than one sensor simultaneously. Here, in
the context of circular motion, the gyroscope (or angular
velocity sensor) and the accelerometer are used to inde-pendently measure the angular velocity and the centripe-tal acceleration of a moving smartphone in a rotatingframe. This experiment can be proposed as an outdooractivity, using a merry-go-round, or in the laboratory,using a bike wheel on a horizontal support. (E)
37. “Acceleration measurements using smartphone sensors:
Dealing with the equivalence principle,” M. Monteiro,
C. Cabeza, and A. C. Marti, Rev. Bras. Ens. F /C19ıs.37(1),
1303 (2015). Because of the principle of equivalence, anaccelerometer cannot distinguish acceleration from agravitational ﬁeld without additional information.Accelerometer sensors are, in fact, force sensors thatprovide an apparent acceleration, also known as a g-
force or force per unit mass, given by the real accelera-tion minus the gravitational acceleration (all vectors).
Using the information from the gyroscope and the accel-
erometer sensors, it is possible to obtain the real acceler-ation of the mobile device. This article implements thismethod for a physical pendulum supplemented withvideo analysis. (I)
38. “Using a smartphone acceleration sensor to study uni-
form and uniformly accelerated circular motions,” J. C.
333 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 333 04 October 2023 23:08:03
Castro-Palacio, L. Vel /C19azquez, J. A. G /C19omez-Tejedor, F. J.
Manj /C19on, and J. A. Monsoriu, Rev. Bras. Ens. F /C19ıs.36(2)
1–5 (2014). A smartphone is placed on a rotating table(an old-fashioned turntable), and the components of the
accelerations are obtained and compared with results
obtained using video analysis for uniform and uniformlyaccelerated circular motion. (E)
39. “Discovering quantities of circular motion of a light-
emitting toy train using a smartphone light sensor,” S.Kapucu, Phys. Teach. 57(7) 480–482 (2019). Using a
light-emitting toy train and a smartphone’s light sensor,it is possible to measure kinematics magnitudes like lin-ear speed, angular velocity, and centripetal acceleration.Video analysis is used to corroborate the results. Thisapproach applies only to uniform circular motion and isindirect because it requires relating illumination valuesto mechanical quantities. (I)
40. “Determination of the angular velocity of a simple pro-
peller with a smartphone proximity sensor,” S. Kapucuand M. S ¸ims¸ek,Phys. Educ. 56(3), 033003 (2021). The
only experiment referenced in this Resource Letter thatuses the proximity sensor, this simple experiment that
can be performed at home and measures the angular
velocity of a home-made propeller. (E)
41. “Determination of the radius of curves and roundabouts
with a smartphone,” C. Fahsl and P. Vogt, Phys. Teach.
57(8), 566–567 (2019). Two outdoor experiments are
proposed to determine the radius of curvature of streets.The ﬁrst one can be performed traveling in a car or othervehicle using data collected by the accelerometer. Thesecond one follows the approach proposed in Ref. 36
that uses the accelerometer and gyroscope simulta-neously to obtain the radius of curvature. In both cases,the results obtained can be compared with direct mea-surements or with road maps. (E)
42. “Measurement of Coriolis acceleration with a
smartphone,” A. Shakur and J. Kraft, Phys. Teach.
54(5), 288–290 (2016). The Coriolis acceleration is
rather difﬁcult to measure in traditional undergraduatelaboratories. In this ingenious experiment, a smartphone
slides down a rotating vertical nearly semi-circular track.
Thanks to the built-in gyroscope and accelerometer, therelationship between Coriolis acceleration and angularvelocity is obtained. As the relative velocity is rathersmall, a discussion about the uncertainties is provided.(I)
43. “Angular acceleration of the non-linear pendulum,” P. F.
Hinrichsen, Phys. Educ. 55, 055018 (2020). In this
experiment, acceleration and rotation sensors installed ina pendulum provide the opportunity to analyze thesemagnitudes. Although simple pendulums could seemsimple and straightforward, the large-amplitude nonlin-ear regime offers challenges such as the analysis ofphase space and the effect of a weak damping. (I)
44. “Exploration of large pendulum oscillations and damp-
ing using a smartphone,” D. Li, L. Liu, and S. Zhou,Phys. Teach. 58(9), 634–636 (2020). Linear and nonlin-
ear oscillations of a simple pendulum are investigated
using a photogate built with a laser pointer as an emitterand the ambient light sensor of a smartphone as thereceiver. By gluing a small piece of cardboard to thelower end of the pendulum, the effect of the damping isstudied, and the coefﬁcient of damping is obtained bymeans of a nonlinear ﬁt. (I)45. “Exploring phase space using smartphone acceleration
and rotation sensors simultaneously,” M. Monteiro, C.Cabeza, and A. C. Mart /C19ı,Eur. J. Phys. 35(4), 045013
(2014). In this experiment, a physical (or compound)
pendulum is built with a smartphone ﬁxed to a bike
wheel oscillating or rotating in a vertical plane. Sincesmartphones provide simultaneous measurement withmore than one sensor, it is possible, in a system with onedegree of freedom like this, to measure the angularvelocity and centripetal acceleration simultaneously.These two variables allow the determination of two gen-eralized coordinates, and thus provide a simple way todiscuss phase space and turn this advanced concept intoa more tangible motion. (A)
46. “Phase plot of a gravity pendulum acquired via the
MEMS gyroscope and magnetic ﬁeld sensors of asmartphone,” T. Splith, A. Kaps, and F. Stallmach, Am.J. Phys. 90(4), 314–316 (2022). This work exploits the
advantage of smartphones to take two or more simulta-neous measurements from its sensors. Here the device isused as the bob of a pendulum, then the angular velocity
is obtained from the smartphone’s gyroscope, while the
angular displacement is derived from the magnetometerand the orientation of the smartphone in the Earth’s mag-netic ﬁeld. The data is used to analyze and plot the phasespace of the motion of the smartphone as a dampedoscillator. Detailed instructions are provided by theauthors in a supplementary material to allow performingthis experiment as a conventional lab, as a home-lab, oreven as lecture demonstration. (A)
47. “The mobile phone as a free-rotation laboratory,” M. S.
Wheatland, T. Murphy, D. Naomenko, D. van Schijndel,and G. Katsiﬁs, Am. J. Phys. 89, 342–348 (2021). The
tennis racket or Dzhanibekov effect is an interestingclassical mechanics phenomenon only reported a fewdecades ago. When a rigid body is freely rotating aboutthe principal axis of inertia, the motion is unstablearound the intermediate axis but stable about the twoother axes. Although more spectacular in a zero-gravity
setup, the effect is also seen when a smartphone is
thrown into the air while its angular velocity is recordedby the three-axis gyroscope sensor. Quantitative resultsare analyzed in the light of Euler’s equations. (A)
48. “Pendulum rides, rotations and the Coriolis effect,”
A.-M. Pendrill and C. Modig, Phys. Educ. 53(4), 045017
(2018). Amusement parks offer an opportunity to experi-ment with mechanical systems on a large scale.Although there is an extensive literature about ﬁeld tripsto amusement parks using traditional equipment, thisarticle together with Refs. 49,53, and 54describes sev-
eral experiments performed using mobile devices. Thequalitative analysis of the data registered by the sensorsinvolves several interesting tasks at different educationallevels, from a two-dimensional ride in a pendulum to morecomplicated three-dimensional rotations. Moreover, insome amusement park attractions the Coriolis acceleration
is sufﬁciently large to be detected by the accelerometer. (E)
49. “Mathematics, measurement and experience of rotations
around three axes,” A.-M. Pendrill,
Eur. J. Phys. 40(1),
015003 (2018). Rotations in 3D are thrilling but difﬁcultto visualize and understand. Amusement parks, however,are places where three-dimensional rotations can bedirectly feltby the experimenter. This article (in con-
junction with the previous reference) can be a starting
334 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 334 04 October 2023 23:08:03
point for a ﬁeld trip to an amusement park with the
objective of analyzing the physics of rotations. (A)
50. “The Atwood machine revisited using smartphones,” M.
Monteiro, C. Stari, C. Cabeza, and A. C. Mart /C19ı,Phys.
Teach. 53(6), 373–374 (2015). A historical experiment
is transformed to be performed using a smartphone’s
accelerometer to measure the acceleration and compareit with the prediction given by Newton’s second law. (E)
51. “Using iPads to illustrate the impulse-momentum
relationship,” J. W. Streepey, Phys. Teach. 51(1), 54–55
(2013). A very simple experiment that only requires asmartphone with built-in accelerometer sliding on atable: The impulse when the smartphone is quicklypushed forward and released is obtained from the areaunder the curve of the acceleration vs time, allowing asemi-qualitative analysis of the relationship with thechange of momentum. (E)
52. “Modelling of a collision between two smartphones,” V.
L. B. de Jesus and D. G. G. Sasaki Phys. Educ. 51(5),
055006 (2016). A very simple setup consisting of twosmartphones with a piece of sponge glued onto one ofthem, sliding on a lacquered-wood table. Acceleration
and velocity, obtained by numerical integration, are the
input elements to analyze collisions and the impulse-momentum theorem. (E)
53. “Smartphones and Newton’s ﬁrst law in escalators and
roller coasters,” A.-M. Pendrill, Phys. Educ. 55, 035016
(2020). Using the smartphone sensors, photographs, andvideo analysis, it is possible to experiment with yourown body to demonstrate basic kinematics and dynamicsconcepts and get insights into Newton’s laws. (E)
54. “Virtual reality, video screen shots and sensor data for a
large drop tower ride,” M. Burt and A.-M. Pendrill,Phys. Educ. 55, 055017 (2020). Amusement parks also
allow measurement of the personal experience of largetower drops. Combining accelerometer and pressure sen-sors, acceleration and height can be obtained in twoindependent ways. (E)
55. “Impulse measurement using an Arduino,” P. R.
Espindola, C. R. Cena, D. C. B. Alves, D. F. Bozano,and A. M. B. Goncalves, Phys. Educ. 53(3), 035005
(2018). A simple experiment to study the impulse-
momentum theorem using a freely falling body attachedto a rubber string. The force due to the tension on therubber string is obtained by means of an Arduino board.It can be adapted to be performed with smartphone sen-sors. (E)
56. “A simple experiment to measure the maximum coefﬁ-
cient of static friction with a smartphone,” S. Kapucu,Phys. Educ. 53(5), 053006 (2018). The smartphone is
used as an object placed on an inclined plane and the ori-entation pseudo sensor is used to determine the staticfriction coefﬁcient between the smartphone and theplane. (E)
57. “Collecting data with a mobile phone: Studies of
mechanical laws such as energy and momentum con-servation,” M. Hart and M. G. Kuzyk, Am. J. Phys.
88(11), 948–957 (2020). The setup includes a smart-
phone as a zenithal high-speed camera to register the
motion of billiard balls. Using video analysis, two-dimensional trajectories of the balls are obtained. Thisdidactic paper presents an extensive analysis of momen-tum conservation, rolling and sliding friction, angularmomentum, and dissipative forces. (A)58. “Measuring a spring constant with a smartphone mag-
netic ﬁeld sensor,” U. Pili and R. Violanda, Phys. Teach.
57(3), 198–199 (2019). The magnetometer of a mobile
device is used to measure the period of oscillations in amass-spring system and then to determine the spring
constant dynamically. (E)
59. “Rotational energy in a physical pendulum,” M.
Monteiro, C. Cabeza, and A. C. Marti, Phys. Teach.
52(3), 180–181 (2014). The angular velocity sensor (or
gyroscope) is especially suited to measure the rotationalkinetic energy in many experimental setups, including
the physical pendulum in this experiment. (E)
60. “Physical pendulum experiment re-investigated with an
accelerometer sensor,” C. Dauphin and F. Bouquet, Pap.
Phys. 10, 100008 (2018). A low-cost experiment in
mechanics with Arduino and an external accelerometeris described that measures radial and orbital accelera-
tions at different positions of the axis of a compound
pendulum. It can be easily adapted to be performed with
a mobile device.
61. “Superposition of oscillation on the metapendulum:
Visualization of energy conservation with thesmartphone,” D. Weiler and A. Bewersdorff, Phys.
Teach. 57(9), 646–647 (2019). The metapendulum ,a
combination of both the simple gravity pendulum and the
spring pendulum, is a non-typical mechanical system
with two degrees of freedom. This experiment is appro-priate for studying normal frequency, normal modes, and
resonances. The experimental setup turns out to be very
simple when using the accelerometer of a smartphone to
measure horizontal and vertical acceleration. (E)
62. “Newton’s cradle: Using a smartphone sound sensor to
extract gfrom the sound of impacts,” U. B. Pili, Phys.
Educ. 56
(4), 043005 (2021). The sound of impacts of the
balls of the well-known Newton’s cradle are used to
obtain the period of oscillation of a simple pendulum
and then, the gravitational acceleration. (E)
63. “Demonstration of the parallel axis theorem through a
smartphone,” I. Salinas, M. H. Gimenez, J. A. Monsoriu,
and J. A. Sans, Phys. Teach. 57(5), 340–341 (2019). A
torsion pendulum, with a smartphone ﬁxed to it, is usefulfor visualizing simple harmonic, damped, and forced
motion. The components of the acceleration are mea-
sured with a smartphone sensor, and the analysis allows
students to explore the parallel axis theorem. (E)
64. “Experimental analysis of a compound pendulum with
variable suspension point,” M. Monteiro, C. Stari, C.Cabeza, and A. C. Marti, Phys. Educ. (55)2, 023004
(2020). A large metallic bar with equidistant holes serves
as a physical, or compound, pendulum with variable sus-
pension point. The gyroscope sensor and photogate are
used to measure the period of oscillations as a functionof the position of the suspension point and compare it
with a theoretical model. (I)
65. “Combined viscous and dry friction damping of oscilla-
tory motion,” P. F. Hinrichsen and C. I. Larnder, Am. J.
Phys. 86(8), 577–584 (2018). An external accelerometer
mounted on a glider on an air track is used to analyzedamped oscillations due to viscous and dry friction. It
can be easily adapted to be performed with mobile-
device sensors. The effect of both contributions to
damping is analyzed by systematic variations of the air
pressure in the air track. (I)
335 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 335 04 October 2023 23:08:03
66. “Interactive modeling activities in the classroom–
rotational motion and smartphone gyroscopes,” R. P €orn
and M. Brask /C19en,Phys. Educ. 51(6), 065021 (2016). This
introduction to the use of gyroscope sensors in a class-
room setting proposes several activities for experiment-
ing with the dynamics of objects rotating about a ﬁxedaxis. (E)
67. “Analyzing the dynamics of a yo-yo using a smartphone
gyroscope sensor,” I. Salinas, M. Monteiro, A. C. Marti,and J. A. Monsoriu, Phys. Teach. 58(8), 569–571
(2020). The yo-yo is a traditional toy with several inter-esting dynamical aspects, involving torque, rotationalkinetic energy, and angular acceleration. In this experi-ment, the angular velocity of a fast-rotating object is suc-cessfully measured using the smartphone gyroscopeattached to a homemade yo-yo. In this way, the dynamicscan be analyzed and compared with independently mea-sured quantities such as the moment of inertia. Thisexperiment can be complemented with video analysis. (I)
68. “Angular momentum,” A. Shakur and T. Sinatra, Phys.
Teach. 51(9), 564–565 (2013). Dropping weights onto a
spinning turntable and measuring the change in angular
velocity with a smartphone’s gyroscope, the conserva-
tion of angular momentum is veriﬁed as well as the non-conservation of rotational kinetic energy. (E)
69. “Tilting motion and the moment of inertia of the
smartphone,” A. Kaps and F. Stallmach, Phys. Teach.
58(3), 216–217 (2020). The moment of inertia of a
smartphone is determined by measuring the angularvelocity with its gyroscope during a controlled tiltingmotion. (E)
70. “Comment on ‘Tilting Motion and the Moment of
Inertia of the Smartphone’,” P. F. Hinrichsen, Phys.
Teach. 60(3), 223–225 (2022). An enhanced analysis of
the previous work is presented to obtain the moment ofinertia of a smartphone. Analyzing the full set of angularvelocity data from the gyroscope during the tiltingmotion, the author shows how to know if the pivot edgeslips or does not slip during the toppling motion and con-sequently shows how to improve the precision of the
value of the moment of inertia. (A)
71. “The toppling of a uniform rectangular block,” P. F.
Hinrichsen, Am. J. Phys. 89(11), 1026–1032 (2021). The
experiment setup analyzed in the two previous referen-ces is further investigated considering in this case a uni-form rectangular box. The inclination angle is measuredfor different materials and, hence, friction coefﬁcientsbetween the pivot edge and the horizontal surface onwhich the box is at rest. Experimental data obtained withMEMs gyro/accelerometers is complemented withTracker video analysis.
72. “Understanding coffee spills using a smartphone,” F.
Tornar /C19ıa, M. Monteiro, and A. C. Mart /C19ı,Phys. Teach.
52(8), 502–503 (2014). A simple and economical experi-
ment is proposed to explain the physics of the SpillNot,a device designed to carry a hot beverage in a cup with-out spilling. In this experiment, a smartphone substitutes
for the cup. Its sensor measures the acceleration while
the device is oscillating or turning in a vertical plane.The qualitative comparison of the radial and tangentialcomponents of the acceleration is used to explain thefunctioning of the device. (E)
73. “An Arduino investigation of simple harmonic motion,”
C. Galeriu, S. Edwards, and G. Esper, Phys. Teach.52(3), 157–159 (2014). An example of a useful and low-
cost of Arduino-based experiment. An ultrasonic dis-tance sensor connected to an Arduino board is used tomeasure the simple harmonic motion of a mass on a
spring. (E)
74. “Analyzing simple pendulum phenomena with a smart-
phone acceleration sensor,” P. Vogt and J. Kuhn, Phys.
Teach. 50(8), 439–440 (2012). In this setup, the smart-
phone acts as the bob of a pendulum allowing analysisof the relationship between period and length. (E)
75. “Analyzing spring pendulum phenomena with a smart-
phone acceleration sensor,” J. Kuhn and P. Vogt, Phys.
Teach. 50(8), 504–505 (2012). This paper experiments
with a mass-spring system and a system of two coupledoscillators. (E)
76. “Using a mobile phone acceleration sensor in physics
experiments on free and damped harmonic oscillations,”J. C. Castro-Palacio, L. Vel /C19azquez-Abad, M. H.
Gim/C19enez, and J. A. Monsoriu, Am. J. Phys. 81(6),
472–475 (2013). A smartphone is placed on a glider con-nected by a spring to a ﬁxed support. In this article,results for the period, frequency, spring constant, and
damping constant are obtained from the acceleration
sensor experiments on free and damped oscillations. (E)
77. “Damped oscillations with a smart cart,” A. Shakur and
J. Emmert, Phys. Teach. 57(7), 490–492 (2019). An
experiment on damped oscillations is performed with thePASCO’s wireless Smart Cart and the free SPARKvueapp for smartphones to show the simplicity achieved byreplacing many traditional laboratory sensors, wires, andother equipment. (E)
78. “Smartphones on the air track. Examples and
difﬁculties,” M. Gonz
/C19alez-Delgado, A. G /C19omez, and M.
Gonz /C19alez-Rebollo, Pap. Phys. 10, 100005 (2018). In this
work, a classic experiment is proposed with a smart-phone on an air track to study the conservation ofmomentum in collisions and the effect of friction forces.In this, and in Ref. 76, only an air track, a couple of
gliders, and springs are needed in addition to the smart-phone. (E)
79. “A quantitative analysis of coupled oscillations using
mobile accelerometer sensors,” J. C. Castro-Palacio, L.
Vel/C19azquez-Abad, F. Gim /C19enez, and J. A. Monsoriu, Eur.
J. Phys. 34(3), 737–744 (2013). Two smartphones are
placed on gliders connected by springs on an air track.The accelerometers are used to perform a quantitativeanalysis of symmetric and asymmetric normal modes ina system of coupled oscillators. (E)
80. “Instrumentation for mechanical vibrations analysis in
the time domain and frequency domain using theArduino platform,” M. Varanis, A. Langone Silva, P. H.Ayres Brunetto, and R. Ferreira Gregolin, Rev. Bras.
Ens. F /C19ıs.38(1), 1301 (2016). A set of low-cost sensors
such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, and ultrasonic dis-tance sensors are used together with an Arduino board tomeasure vibrations in mechanical systems, like a beam,using
PYTHON for signal processing. (I)
81. “Driven damped harmonic oscillator resonance with an
Arduino,” A. M. B. Goncalves, C. R. Cena, and D. F.
Bozano, Phys. Educ. 52(4), 043002 (2017). Resonance
in a harmonic oscillator is quantitatively analyzed bymeans of an Arduino board that controls the oscillationswith a servo motor and measures the oscillation ampli-tude with an ultrasonic position sensor. (I)
336 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 336 04 October 2023 23:08:03
82. “Computer-based learning in an undergraduate physics
course: Interfacing a mobile phone and MATLAB to
study oscillatory motion,” E. Momox and C. Ortega De
Maio, Am. J. Phys. 88(7), 535–541 (2020). This paper
offers the possibility of experimenting with free and
damped oscillations by interfacing mobile devices to
widely used MATLAB software in real time, facilitating
graphics visualization. (I)
83. “The parametric resonance-from LEGO Mindstorms to
cold atoms,” T. Kawalec and A. Sierant, Eur. J. Phys.
38(4), 045001 (2017). A spectacular driven pendulum
made with LEGO Mindstorm pieces is described to
investigate the parametric resonance in a simple pendu-
lum by means of an actuator and a wireless absolute ori-
entation sensor. (I)
84. “Acceleration, velocity, and displacement for magneti-
cally damped oscillations,” P. F. Hinrichsen, Phys.
Teach. 57, 250–253 (2019). A wireless accelerometer
mounted on the side of a cart is used to measure acceler-
ation during oscillatory motion that is subject to
velocity-dependent damping. Velocity and displacement
are derived from the acceleration, allowing quantitative
observation of some characteristics of the system
dynamics, like the transition to critical damping and the
velocity dependence of the drag and energy decay. (I)
VII. WAVES AND SOUND
Oscillations and waves can be studied using smartphone
microphones and speakers. Several experiments typically
performed using stopwatches have been redesigned to use
smartphones, improving their precision. These experiments
address concepts such as stationary waves, harmonics, reso-
nance, the speed of sound in different media. In addition, the
high processing speed of built-in CPUs allows real-time fast
Fourier transform (FFT) analysis to identify the main fre-
quencies of a sound wave, measure the resonant frequency
of a system, or visualize a melody in a spectrogram. It is
worth noting that most of the experiments proposed in this
section are very economical (see also Refs. 21,22, and 25).
Also note that in some modern smartphones, the audio port
is replaced by Bluetooth alternatives. Reference 16describes
how external sensors can be connected via Bluetooth.
85. “Analyzing acoustic phenomena with a smartphone
microphone,” J. Kuhn and P. Vogt, Phys. Teach. 51(1),
118–119 (2013). This article takes advantage of the
speed of smartphone CPUs to perform real-time FFT to
analyze and visualize different sounds (noise, musical
instruments, voices). (E)
86. “Smartphone-aided measurements of the speed of
sound in different gaseous mixtures,” S. O. Parolin and
G. Pezzi, Phys. Teach. 51(8), 508–509 (2013). A sim-
ple setup with a PVC pipe and two smartphones is
described that measures the speed of sound in different
gases by the time-of-ﬂight technique. (E)
87. “Determining the speed of sound with stereo head-
phones,” P. Vogt and J. Kuhn, Phys. Teach. 50(5),
308–309 (2012). A simple experiment is described to
measure the speed of sound by the time transit method
using stereo headphones and a computer-aided data
measurement system. (E)
88. “Measuring the speed of sound in air using a smart-
phone and a cardboard tube,” S. Hellesund, Phys. Educ.54(3), 035015 (2019). In this very economical experi-
ment, a cardboard tube is used as a Kundt’s tube, andsound waves are generated with a smartphone, sweep-
ing a range of frequencies to determine the values of
resonance. (E)
89. “A bottle of tea as a universal Helmholtz resonator,”
M. Monteiro, C. Stari, C. Cabeza, and A. C. Mart /C19ı,
Phys. Teach. 56(9), 644–645 (2018). A simple and
novel setup for the classic experiment of the bottle as aHelmholtz resonator: The resonance frequency is mea-
sured with a smartphone for different levels of water
inside the bottle. A digital balance is used to determinethe volume of air in the bottle. In addition, the sound
speed can be obtained by linearizing the relationship
between resonance frequency and volume. (I)
90. “Measuring the speed of sound in air using smartphone
applications,” A. Yavuz, Phys. Educ. 50
(3), 281
(2015). An experiment for measuring the speed of
sound in air is revisited. A smartphone is used as a sig-
nal generator, and a glass pipe is used as a resonator
with one end immersed in water to change the lengthand ﬁnd the nodes of sound waves. (E)
91. “Stationary waves in tubes and the speed of sound,” L.
Kasper, P. Vogt, and C. Strohmeyer, Phys. Teach.
53(1), 52–53 (2015). An inexpensive experiment using
only drainpipes and smartphones. Despite its title, in
this article the speed of sound is determined by measur-
ing the delay time of echoes produced in long pipeswith a smartphone. (E)
92. “Measurement of sound velocity made easy using har-
monic resonant frequencies with everyday mobile tech-
nology,” M. Hirth, J. Kuhn, and A. M €uller, Phys.
Teach. 53(2), 120–121 (2015). Harmonic resonant fre-
quencies in a tube are simultaneously triggered by the
sound created by crumpling paper. The resonant fre-quencies are measured by plotting a spectrogram using
a smartphone. (E)
93. “Simple time-of-ﬂight measurement of the speed of
sound using smartphones,” S. Staacks, S. H €utz, H.
Heinke, and C. Stampfer, Phys. Teach. 57(2), 112–113
(2019). Two smartphones, one used as an emitter and
the other as a receiver, measure the time of travel ofsound, allowing the determination of the speed of
sound in air. (E)
94. “Measuring the acoustic response of Helmholtz reso-
nators,” M. Monteiro, A. C. Marti, P. Vogt, L. Kasper,and D. Quarthal, Phys. Teach. 53(4), 247–249 (2015).
A glass beaker ﬁlled with gas is used as an acoustic res-
onator. The acoustic response curves are obtained witha smartphone to determine the speed of sound in differ-
ent gases. (E)
95. “Measuring the acoustic response of classrooms with a
smartphone,” E. Macho-Stadler and M. J. Elejalde-Garcia, Phys. Teach. 58(8), 585–588 (2020). An active
learning experimental activity on room acoustics is put
forward, using smartphones as measuring tools of theacoustic parameters of a classroom, including reverber-
ation and intelligibility. (I)
96. “Analyzing elevator oscillation with the smartphone
acceleration sensors,” J. Kuhn, P. Vogt, and A. M €uller,
Phys. Teach. 52(1), 55–56 (2014). Vertical acceleration
is measured with a smartphone during an elevator ride
to analyze the oscillations of the elevator car. (E)
337 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 337 04 October 2023 23:08:03
97. “Oscillations studied with the smartphone ambient light
sensor,” J. A. Sans, F. J. Manj /C19on, A. L. J. Pereira, J. A.
Gomez-Tejedor, and J. A. Monsoriu, Eur. J. Phys.
34(6), 1349–1354 (2013). This article shows that a
smartphone’s light sensor can be used as a position sen-
sor. This sensor is used to take measurements from a
system of two coupled springs undergoing simple or
damped oscillatory motion and the frequency, spring
constant, and damping time are found. (I)
98. “Corkscrewing and speed of sound: A surprisingly sim-
ple experiment,” K. Lutz and P. Vogt, Phys. Teach.
58(4), 278–279 (2020). The cylindrical neck of a bottle
partially ﬁlled with water is used as a one-side-closed
pipe resonator. Students can systematically vary the
resonator length by ﬁlling in water to different levels.
When uncorking the bottle, or simply using a wet ﬁnger
to generate a plop noise, a peak frequency is measured
with a smartphone, for different levels of water. (E)
99. “Determining the speed of sound as a function of tem-
perature using Arduino,” M. Dumas Hahn, F. A. de
Oliveira Cruz, and P. S. Carvalho, Phys. Teach. 57(2),
114–115 (2019). A low-cost setup with an Arduino
board, an ultrasonic distance sensor, and four tempera-
ture sensors is used to analyze the dependence of the
speed of sound dependence on temperature. Although
this experiment goes beyond the use of mobile-device
sensors, it can complement other experiments focused
on sound speed. (I)
100. “Using smartphones as hydrophones: Two experiments
in underwater acoustics,” M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı,
Phys. Teach. 55(3), 033013 (2020). In the ﬁrst experi-
ment, two smartphones, one of them submersible, are
used to measure the ratio between the speed of sound in
water and the speed of sound in air. This value is deter-
mined from the delay time of a sound signal traveling
through air and water simultaneously. The second
experiment is focused on the ranging of an underwater
acoustic source. (E)
101. “Phonocardiography with a smartphone,” L. J. Thoms,
G. Colicchia, and R. Girwidz, Phys. Educ. 52(2),
023004 (2017). Ideal for introductory physics for life
sciences (IPLS): A very simple and economical experi-
ment is proposed with a smartphone and a microphone
used as an electronic home-made stethoscope to plot a
phonocardiogram and to analyze characteristic heart
sounds. (E)
VIII. LIGHT AND OPTICS
The integrated camera, the liquid crystal display, and the
ambient light sensor are especially suited to perform experi-
ments involving light and optics. The experiments cover a
wide range of topics from geometrical optics to human
vision or shadowgraphy. The use of smartphones as simple
but powerful microscopes enables a range of experiments.
102. “Characterization of linear light sources with the smart-
phone’s ambient light sensor,” I. Salinas, M. H.
Gim/C19enez, J. A. Monsoriu, and J. C. Castro-Palacio,
Phys. Teach. 56(8), 562–563 (2018). The illuminance
of a linear ﬂuorescent tube is measured with the ambi-
ent light sensor of a smartphone as a function of dis-
tance, verifying the well-known inverse-square law for
distance. (E)103. “Studying ray optics with a smartphone,” A. Girot, N.
A. Goy, A. Vilquin, and U. Delabre, Phys. Teach.
58(2), 133–135 (2020). A simple experiment is pro-
posed to determine the focal length of the converging
lens of a smartphone camera, introducing students to
ray optics and thin lenses. (E)
104. “Smartphone magniﬁcation attachment: Microscope or
magnifying glass,” T. Hergem €oller and D. Laumann,
Phys. Teach. 55(6), 361–364 (2017). An improved low-
cost smartphone microscope is proposed by means of a3D-printed clip and a small glass bead, enabling pic-tures to be taken with up to 780 /C2magniﬁcation. (EI)
105. “The polarization of light and Malus’ law using
smartphones,” M. Monteiro, C. Stari, C. Cabeza, and
A. C. Mart /C19ı,Phys. Teach. 55(5), 264–266 (2017). A
simple and inexpensive setup is proposed to quantita-tively verify Malus’ law. A computer screen is used asa source of polarized light, and the ambient light sensorand the orientation sensors of a smartphone are used totake measurements of the intensity of light as a functionof angle. (E)
106. “Video analysis-based experiments regarding Malus’
law,” T. Rosi and P. Onorato, Phys. Educ. 55(4),
045011 (2020). An experimental setup, similar to theprevious reference, to analyze Malus’ law. The lightfrom a source of polarized light is recorded with a cam-era while a polarizer is rotated in front of the cameralens. Video analysis software on a computer is used toobtain the intensity of light and the angle of the polar-izer. (E)
107. “Color reproduction with a smartphone,” L.-J. Thoms,
G. Colicchia, and R. Girwidz, Phys. Teach. 51(7),
440–441 (2013). A simple experiment, only requiring amicroscope and a smartphone, that explores the rela-tionship between RGB color generation and humanvision. (E)
108. “A simple experiment to measure the inverse square
law of light in daylight conditions,” F. Vera, R. Rivera,and M. Ort /C19ız,Eur. J. Phys. 35, 015015 (2014). A simple
device made with an Arduino board and a light sensor
inside a tube is used to measure irradiance versus dis-
tance. (E)
109. “A simple experimental setup for teaching additive col-
ors with Arduino,” P. S. Carvalho and M. Hahn, Phys.
Teach. 54, 244–245 (2016). An Arduino board is
designed like a game with the capability of easilychanging the intensities in an RGB LED, as a way ofimproving students’ understanding of color mixing. (E)
110. “Arduino-based experiment demonstrating Malus’s
law,” W. P. S. Freitas, C. R. Cena, D. C. B. Alves, andA. M. B. Goncalves, Phys. Educ. 53(3), 035034 (2018).
A setup based on an Arduino board, a light sensor tomeasure transmitted light irradiance, and a potentiome-ter connected to a polarizer to measure the rotationangle. (E)
111. “Polarization imaging application with smartphones,”
P. Yan, H. Xia, J. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Wei, F. Ji, and S.Shu, Phys. Teach. 57(9), 594–596 (2019). A simple
imaging polarimeter made with a polarizer and a 3D
printed structure attached to a smartphone’s cameracreates a tool for eliminating stray light and identifyingobjects with polarized light. (E)
112. “Demonstrating birefringence using a smartphone cam-
era,” C. Puttharugsa, P. Bintachitt, S. Wicharn, and
338 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 338 04 October 2023 23:08:03
S. Plaipichit, Phys. Teach. 60(3), 232–233 (2022). A
simple experiment is proposed to observe birefringence
in everyday materials, such polystyrene plastic spoons,
using light emitted by a notebook screen, a smartphone
camera and a polarizer ﬁlter. It provides a starting point
to analyze internal stress and photoelasticity. (I)
113. “A practical classroom iPad shadowgraph system,” B.
Gearhart and D. MacIsaac, Phys. Teach. 58(1), 8–11
(2020). A simple system is designed with an LED ﬂash-
light, a parabolic mirror, and a smartphone camera to
perform many interesting activities in which invisible
phenomena are made visible. Although it is less expen-
sive than commercial setups, it does require a relatively
expensive small telescope-like mirror. (I)
114. “Interference and diffraction in modern technology: A
new approach for an introductory physics laboratory
experiment,” K. Rabosky, C. Ingleﬁeld, and K. Spirito,
Phys. Teach. 58(9), 646–648 (2020). In a non-
traditional setup, a smartphone sensor is not used;
rather the smartphone’s screen is used as a reﬂective
diffraction grating allowing the study of diffraction pat-
terns, thin-ﬁlm interference, and the effectiveness of
anti-reﬂection coatings. An optical bench, a rotating
turntable and a light source are needed for the setup. (I)
IX. ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM
Thanks to the magnetic ﬁeld sensor, several experiments
have been designed to measure magnetic ﬁelds produced by
currents or magnets. Most of these experiments are easy and
inexpensive to perform. In contrast, experiments involving
measurements of voltages or currents are possible, using the
microphone input, transforming the smartphone into a portable
oscilloscope. These are limited due to the danger of damaging
the mobile device by connecting a large voltage. A safer alter-
native is to send signals to the smartphone via Bluetooth from
devices, such as Arduino BLE, as described in Ref. 16.
115. “Magnetic ﬁeld sensor,” N. Silva, Phys. Teach. 50(6),
372–373 (2012). One of the most direct uses of the
smartphone magnetometer measure the magnetic ﬁeld
of current-carrying coil as a function of the number of
turns of the coil. (E)
116. “Demonstrations of magnetic phenomena: Measuring
the air permeability using tablets,” V. O. M. Lara, D. F.
Amaral, D. Faria, and L. P. Vieira, Phys. Educ. 49(6),
658 (2014). This paper describes a simple and econom-
ical experiment to ﬁnd the dependence of a magnetic
ﬁeld on the distance to a permanent magnet or a coil
carrying an electric current. Air permeability can also
be accurately obtained. (E)
117. “Measurement of the magnetic ﬁeld of small magnets
with a smartphone: A very economical laboratory prac-
tice for introductory physics courses,” E. Arribas, I.
Escobar, C. P. Suarez, A. Najera, and A. Bel /C19endez,
Eur. J. Phys. 36(6), 065002 (2015). The dependence of
the magnetic ﬁeld of small refrigerator magnets with
distance is measured in this inexpensive experiment. It
also provides a good opportunity to discuss least-square
ﬁtting and uncertainties. (E)
118. “Linear quadrupole magnetic ﬁeld measured with a
smartphone,” E. Arribas, I. Escobar, R. Ramirez-
Vazquez, C. del P. Suarez Rodriguez, J. Gonzalez-
Rubio, and A. Belendez, Phys. Teach. 58(3), 182–185(2020). An experiment is described that uses widely
available materials to ﬁnd the dependence on distanceof the magnetic ﬁeld produced by a quadrupolar
arrangement of permanent magnets. (E)
119. “Magnetic ﬁeld ‘ﬂyby’ measurement using a smart-
phone’s magnetometer and accelerometer simulta-neously,” M. Monteiro, C. Stari, C. Cabeza, and A. C.
Mart/C19ı,Phys. Teach. 55(9), 580–581 (2017). Taking
advantage of the ability to simultaneously measurewith more than one sensor, it is possible to ﬁnd the spa-
tial dependence of a magnetic ﬁeld by just moving the
smartphone. (E)
120. “Estimating RC time constants using sound,” J. R.
Groff, Phys. Teach.
57(6), 393–396 (2019). An original
approach to the study of a simple DC circuit. The sound
produced by a piezoelectric buzzer and measured by asmartphone is used to estimate the discharging time
constant of the circuit. (E)
121. “Smartphones and tracker in the e/m experiment,” M.
Pirbhai, Phys. Educ. 55(1), 015001 (2019). This classic
modern physics experiment can be performed using a
smartphone to measure the magnetic ﬁeld intensity and
video analysis to obtain the radius of curvature of the
beam of particles. (I)
122. “An Arduino investigation of the RC circuit,” C.
Galeriu, C. Letson, and G. Esper, Phys. Teach. 53(5),
285–288 (2015). Arduinos enable an experiment on RC
circuits in an introductory course. (E)
123. “Magnetic ﬁelds produced by electric railways,” M.
Monteiro, G. Organtini, and A.C. Marti, Phys. Teach.
58(8), 600–601 (2020). In an outdoor experiment, stu-
dents investigate large magnetic ﬁelds produced by
electric railways. The measurements can be comple-mented with information about the terrestrial magnetic
ﬁeld and technical characteristics of the railways
obtained on the internet. (I)
124. “Electrocardiography with a smart phone,” L. J.
Thoms, G. Colicchia, B. Watzka, and R. Girwidz,
Phys. Teach. 57(9), 586–589 (2019). By means of a
smartphone, electrodes made with coffee spoons, anda suitable app, it is possible to record the variations in
electrical potential due to cardiac activity in the body
of a volunteer. Especially suitable for IntroductoryPhysics for Life Sciences, it involves the concepts of
electric potential, oscillating dipoles, current, electro-
des, and impedance. (It is not intended for medicaluse.) (I)
125. “Simple determination of Curie temperature using a
smartphone magnetometer,” B. W. Nuryadin and R.
Rusman, Phys. Teach. 57(6), 422–423 (2019). When
the temperature of a ferromagnetic sample is raised
above the Curie point, it becomes a paramagnet. In this
experiment, the Curie temperature of a permanent mag-net is analyzed quantitatively using a smartphone mag-
netometer. This is one the few experiments involving
statistical concepts such as phase transitions and meanﬁeld approach. (I)
126. “Electric circuits as seen by thermal imaging cameras,”
P. K /C19acovsk /C19y,Phys. Teach. 57(9), 597–599 (2019).
Thermal cameras designed to be attached to smart-phones provide the opportunity to perform several
interesting experiments and demonstrations. Pointing
the thermal camera at a DC circuit allows visualization
339 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 339 04 October 2023 23:08:03
of thermoelectric processes involving Kirchhoff’s or
Ohm’s laws. (E)
127. “An indirect measurement of the speed of light in a
general physics laboratory,” E. Arribas, I. Escobar, R.
Ramirez-Vazquez, T. Franco, and A. Belendez, J. King
Saud Univ. Sci. 32(6), 2797–2802 (2020). The speed of
light is obtained from measurements of the permeabil-
ity and permittivity of free space. These experiments
require a parallel-plate capacitor, coils, multimeters,
and a smartphone used as a magnetometer. (I)
128. “A semester-long study of magnetic ﬁelds using smart-
phones to engage non-physics majors,” S. A. Hootman
and C. Pickett, Phys. Teach. 59(2), 108–110 (2021).
Students take part in a project to measure the magneticﬁeld at different locations on their university campus.
This activity is especially suited for life sciences stu-
dents since it also discusses health-related and geophys-
ical issues. (E)
X. MATTER, FLUIDS, THERMAL PHYSICS
Since smartphone batteries dissipate a considerable
amount of energy, temperature sensors are not usually
included in these devices (but see commercial attachments at
https://thermodo.com ). Thus, thermodynamics experiments
for smartphones are rare.
Nonetheless, pressure sensors are available in several
smartphone models and experiments in a variety of topics
have been discussed. Other experiments have been proposed
using Arduino-based sensors, and other ingenious setups are
based on the cellular radio-frequency receptor.
129. “Exploring the atmosphere using smartphones,” M.
Monteiro, P. Vogt, C. Stari, C. Cabeza, and A. C.
Mart/C19ı,Phys. Teach. 54(5), 308–309 (2016). Altitude
and pressure of the lowest layer of the atmosphere aremeasured using a smartphone mounted on a quadcop-
ter. Measurements can be compared with other simple
approximations: Isothermal, constant density, and the
International Standard Atmosphere. (I)
130. “Using smartphone pressure sensors to measure vertical
velocities of elevators, stairways, and drones,” M.
Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı,Phys. Educ. 52(1), 015010
(2017). Pressure sensors, or barometers, although not
present in many smartphones, are very useful to mea-
sure heights and vertical velocities in several contexts
allowing a wide variety of indoor and outdoor experi-
ments. (I)
131. “Using a cell phone to investigate the skin depth effect
in salt water,” J. Rayner, Phys. Teach. 55(2), 83–86
(2017). This article describes a simple demonstration of
skin depth using only a small container ﬁlled with salty
water and a waterproof smartphone as a sensor. Several
interesting activities are proposed; however, the experi-
mental conditions are not fully controlled, and there is
no direct calibration of the relationship between the
amplitude of the ﬁeld and the cellphone’s measure-
ments. (I)
132. “Analyzing Stevin’s law with the smartphone
barometer,” S. Macchia, Phys. Teach. 54(6), 373–373
(2016). The barometer sensor also offers the opportu-
nity to study the dependence of pressure on the depth
of a smartphone submerged in a bucket of water. This
very simple setup only requires a waterproofsmartphone (or a smartphone in a waterproof case)
with a barometer. (E)
133. “Kitchen physics: Lessons in ﬂuid pressure and error
analysis.” R. Vieyra, C. Vieyra, and S. Macchia. Phys.
Teach. 55(2), 87–90 (2017). Two simple experiments
on pressure and density in ﬂuids can be done at home
using, as in the previous reference, a waterproof case
and the pressure sensor (barometer). In the ﬁrst experi-
ment, the density of several ﬂuids is obtained through
the relationship between depth and pressure. Thesecond experiment is devoted to the relation between
pressure and temperature given by Gay-Lussac’s
law. (E)
134. “Transient heat conduction in a heat ﬁn,” J. Brody and
M. Brown, Am. J. Phys. 85
(8), 582–586 (2017). An
inexpensive experiment on heat conduction uses anArduino board and temperature sensors. The experi-
mental results can be readily compared with fundamen-
tal laws. (I)
135. “Temperature-dependent transport measurements with
Arduino,” A. Hilberer, C. Laurent, A. Lorin, A. Partier
et al. ,Pap. Phys. 10, 100007 (2018). This article offers
an extensive and somewhat technical analysis of the
measurement of temperature and resistance of a sam-
ple. Also, the details of two experiments are given:
observing the magnetocaloric effect in gadolinium and
measuring the resistive transition of a high-Tc super-conductor. (A)
136. “Studying Avogadro’s law with Arduino,” A. A. Moya,
Phys. Teach. 57(9), 621–623 (2019). Another example
of the many applications of Arduino boards, an experi-
ment is described to estimate Avogadro’s number from
the kinetic theory of ideal gases through simultaneousmeasurements of temperature, pressure, and volume.
(E)
137. “Experimental analysis of the free surface of a liquid in
a rotating frame,” M. Monteiro, F. Tornar /C19ıa, and A. C.
Mart/C19ı,Eur. J. Phys. 41(3), 035005 (2020). The shape of
the surface of a ﬂuid in a rotating container is obtained
using a gyroscope sensor and video analysis, and its
dependence on the angular velocity is analyzed. (I)
138. “Surface tension measured with Arduino,” A. M. B.
Goncalves, W. P. S. Freitas, D. D. Reis, C. R. Cena, D.
C. B. Alves, and D. F. Bozano, Phys. Teach. 57(9),
640–641 (2019). Through measurements of the weight
of a water droplet suspended at the tip of a pipette and
video analyses, the surface tension between air andwater is obtained. (E)
139. “Measuring the viscosity of air with soapy water, a
smartphone, a funnel, and a hose: An experiment for
undergraduate physics students,” A. Delvert, P. Panizza
and L. Courbin, Am. J. Phys. 90, 64–70 (2022). A
device to measure the air viscosity is proposed withlow cost equipment: soapy water, a funnel, some tub-
ing, a smartphone camera and free software. The spon-
taneous motion of a soap bubble ﬁlm inside the sloping
sides of an inverted funnel is recorded with a camera,
while the ﬁlm moves, pushing air, from the wide open-ing toward the narrow end of the funnel. The kinemat-
ics of the ﬁlm is directly related to the viscosity of air.
Then, analyzing the video and knowing the geometric
and physicochemical parameters of the system, the vis-
cosity of air can be found. (A)
340 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 340 04 October 2023 23:08:03
XI. MODERN PHYSICS
Although smartphones are not especially well-suited to per-
forming experiments in modern physics, several creative
experiments have been put forward, including ones that enable
experiments on radioactivity or requiring particle detectors.The advantage of smartphones in these contexts is clear.
140. “iRadioactivity—Possibilities and limitations for using
smartphones and tablet PCs as radioactive counters,” J.
Kuhn, A. Molz, S. Gr €ober, and J. Fr €ubis, Phys. Teach.
52(6), 351–356 (2014). By covering the camera with a
black tape, it is possible to experiment with radioactiv-
ity in an educational setting. The experiments proposedfocus on the inverse-square law for distance, absorptionlaws, and decay of meta-stable isotopes. Although cam-
era sensors are sensitive to radiation, the characteristics
strongly depend on the speciﬁc sensor. Since generalsensors are not sensitive enough to experiment with
background radiation, a standard radioactivity source,
like those present in many educational laboratories, isneeded. A Geiger counter is advisable for comparison.
141. “Using smartphones and tablet PCs for b
--spectroscopy
in an educational experimental setup,” S. Gr €ober, A.
Molz, and J. Kuhn, Eur. J. Phys. 35(6), 065001 (2014).
Ab_spectrometer can be built using a PC or a mobile
device, a magnetometer, a simple electric circuit, and acommercial90Sr/Y source. A Geiger-M €uller tube is
also advisable for comparison. As in the previous refer-
ence, the app, RadioactivityCounter, measures radioac-tive radiation with the camera sensor. (A)
142. “A low-cost computer-controlled Arduino-based educa-
tional laboratory system for teaching the fundamentals
of photovoltaic cells,” K. Zachariadou, K. Yiasemides,and N. Trougkakos, Eur. J. Phys. 33, 1599–1610
(2012). This paper describes an experiment to learn
about semiconductor physics. Note that there are cur-
rently more suitable alternatives to be used than theapps proposed here. (I)
143. “The desktop muon detector: A simple, physics-
motivated machine- and electronics-shop project for
university students,” S. N. Axani, J. M. Conrad, and C.Kirby, Am. J. Phys. 85, 948 (2017). For less than $100,
it is possible for undergraduates to construct a muon
detector using a silicon photomultiplier to detect scin-
tillation light from particles and an Arduino board fordata acquisition. Its construction develops machine-
shop, electronics-shop, and programming skills. (A).
XII. ASTRONOMY
Experiments related to astronomy make use of the camera
as an observational tool or that simulate astronomical con-
cepts such as parallax, planetary transits, and occultations.
The ambient light sensor also plays a key role in several ofthese experiments.
144. “Using smartphone camera technology to explore stel-
lar parallax: Method, results, and reactions,” M. T.
Fitzgerald, D. H. McKinnon, L. Danaia, and S.Woodward, Astron. Educ. Rev. 10(1), 010108 (2011).
A simple and practical method is proposed to introduce
the parallax technique to determine distances in ascaled system that uses data from a smartphone’scamera, simulating the way astronomers measure some
stellar distances. (I)
145. “Smartphone astronomy,” M. Meißner and H. Haertig,
Phys. Teach. 52(7), 440–441 (2014). In a hands-on
introductory astronomy activity for college or univer-
sity, students measure the speed of the International
Space Station by means of a smartphone’s camera. (E)
146. “Analyzing planetary transits with a smartphone,” A.
Barrera-Garrido, Phys. Teach. 53(3), 179–181 (2015).
A smartphone’s light sensor is used to obtain the light
curve from a scaled stellar system, simulating the tran-
sit method used by astronomers to discover exoplanets.
(E)
147. “A smartphone-based introductory astronomy experi-
ment: Seasons investigation,” J. Durelle, J. Jones, S.
Merriman, and A. Balan, Phys. Teach. 55(2), 122–123
(2017). The origin of the seasons is explained by means
of a model of the Earth-Sun system using a smart-
phone’s light sensor. Light curves are obtained as a
function of latitude, and solstices and equinoxes are
identiﬁed. (E)
148. “Practicing spatial relationship skills using an asteroid
3-D tool,” J. Ziffer, W. Morse, T. Nelson, P. Nakroshis,
B. T. Rudnick, M. Brautigam, and W. Parke, Phys.
Teach. 57(1), 14–16 (2019). An Arduino board and a
light sensor is used to measure the light curve of differ-
ent 3D-printed asteroids while they rotate. (I)
149. “Determination of the orbital inclination of the ISS
with a smartphone,” J. VanderMarlie `re,Phys. Teach.
57(7), 502–503 (2019). A simple experiment to deter-
mine the inclination of the International Space Station
using triangulation from two different locations, mak-
ing use of smartphone sensors to measure azimuth and
elevation. (E)
XIII. PHYSICS EDUCATION RESEARCH
Although the use of smartphones in physics laboratories is
a recent introduction, researchers have already started to
explore their impact on student learning.
150. “An investigation into the effectiveness of smartphone
experiments on students’ conceptual knowledge about
acceleration,” A. Mazzella and I. Testa, Phys. Educ.
51(5), 055010 (2016). This paper investigates the
impact on secondary school students of using smart-
phone sensors vs traditional technologies. It provides
detailed information about the activities performed and
the assessment questionnaires. Although there were no
great differences in the performance of the groups, the
results suggest that smartphone-based activities may
represent a valuable tool for teachers who want toimplement laboratory activities at secondary-school
level. To achieve a proper conceptual understanding,
speciﬁc issues about the smartphone as a transformative
scientiﬁc instrument must be addressed. (I)
151. “The effects of integrating mobile devices with teach-
ing and learning on students’ learning performance: A
meta-analysis and research synthesis,” Y. T. Sung, K.
E. Chang, and T. C. Liu, Comp. Educ. 94, 252–275
(2016). A meta-analysis synthesizing more than one
hundred research reports showed that the application of
mobile devices in education has a moderate sized mean
effect. As it focused neither on sensors nor on
341 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 341 04 October 2023 23:08:03
experimental activities, the results should be considered
with caution. (I)
152. “Project-based physics labs using low-cost open-source
hardware,” F. Bouquet, J. Bobroff, M. Fuchs-Gallezot,and L. Maurines, Am. J. Phys. 85(3), 216–222 (2017).
This paper proposes an extensive list of projects aimed
at third-year university students using open-source,low-cost Arduino boards, and compatible sensors (volt-age, magnetic ﬁeld, temperature, light, sound, accelera-tion, and force). The topics include acoustics,thermodynamics, waves, and matter (including super-conductivity, Peltier cells, and mechanical properties).It offers technical speciﬁcations and case studies usefulto implement the projects, describing not onlytechnicalaspects but also pedagogical and motivational aspects.(A)
153. “Adapting RealTime Physics for distance learning with
the IOLab,” E. Bodegom, E. Jensen, and D. Sokoloff,Phys. Teach. 57(6), 382–386 (2019). While this paper
uses IOLab’s sensor cart to enable distance learninglaboratories, many of the same ideas could be imple-mented using smartphone sensors. (I)
154. “Using smartphones as experimental tools—Effects on
interest, curiosity, and learning in physics education,”K. Hochberg, J. Kuhn, and A. M €uller, J. Sci. Educ.
Tech. 27, 385–403 (2018). One of the main conclusions
of the work that investigated students’ learning in pen-dulum experiments is that “the often-supposed cogni-tive disadvantage of distracting learners withtechnological devices did not lead to reduced learning,whereas interest and curiosity were apparently fostered.(I)
155. “Using smartphones as experimental tools - a follow-
up: Cognitive effects by video analysis and reductionof cognitive load by multiple representations,” K.Hochberg, S. Becker, M. Louis, P. Klein, and J. Kuhn,J. Sci. Educ. Tech. 29, 303–317 (2020). An investiga-
tion about the cognitive effects of working with videoanalysis on tablets instead of working with traditionalexperimental tools. No signiﬁcant differences were
found on interest, curiosity, or cognitive load. (I)
156. “Studies the use of smartphone sensor for physics
learning,” L. Sukariasih, L. Erniwati, L. Sahara, L.Hariroh, and S. Fayanto, Int. J. Sci. Tech. Res. 8(10),
862–870 (2019). The authors offer an extensive list ofdemonstrations across diverse physics ﬁelds, showinghow to adapt classic experiments to use smartphonesensors. (I)
157. “Implementation of smartphone-based experimental
exercises for physics courses at universities,” A. Kaps,T. Splith, and F. Stallmach, Phys. Educ. 56(3), 035004
(2021). In this investigation, traditional theoreticalexercises are partially replaced by experimental miniprojects using smartphones. While the students foundthe experimental exercises slightly more difﬁcult, theyresulted in a better understanding of the physical con-cepts and a much improved motivation to solve the
challenges.
158. “A guide for incorporating e-teaching of physics in a
post-COVID world,” D. J. O’Brien, Am. J. Phys.
89(4), 403–412 (2021). In a paper discussing many
aspects of e-learning, the advantages of smartphonesare explored as educational and experimental tools.Nearly 80 examples of smartphone-based labs andhome introductory physics experiments are provided
and sorted by subject. (I)
159. “Lessons from transforming second-year honors phys-
ics lab,” D. Doucette, B. D’Urso, and C. Singh, Am. J.
Phys. 88, 838 (2020). Focused on the introduction of
new technology, this paper proposes three laboratorymodules encouraging students’ initiative in opposition
to a “black box” philosophy. (I)
XIV. CITIZEN SCIENCE
Mobile-device sensors are especially suited to a broad
range of experiments that enable public participation in iden-
tifying research questions, collecting and analyzing data, and
understanding environmental problems.
160. iSPEX (http://ispex.nl/en/ ).Air pollution. A citizen
science project developed in the Netherlands in 2012 tomeasure atmospheric aerosols, based on a free app anda low-cost add-on for smartphone cameras. The instru-
ment is based on that of the Spectropolarimeter for
Planetary EXploration (SPEX). The citizen scientistsscan the sky while the phone’s camera takes picturesthrough the add-on, recording the spectrum and the lin-
ear polarization of the sunlight that is scattered by sus-
pended dust particles, making a map of contaminants.(A)
161. CrowdMag (https://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/geomag/crowd
mag.shtml ).Geomagnetic ﬁeld. A citizen science project
developed by the geomagnetism group of NOAA’s
National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI).The CrowdMag app uses the built-in magnetometer ofthe phone of volunteers around the world to send mag-netic ﬁeld data to the server of the research group. The
main goal is to use the citizen generated information to
ﬁll in gaps in measurements of Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. (I)
162. MyShake ( https://myshake.berkeley.edu/ ). Earthquake
detection. A citizen science app developed by research-ers from the University of California, Berkeley, that
takes advantage of the ubiquity of smartphones, their
built-in GPS, and tri-axis accelerometers to detect earth-quakes. The aim is to build a global earthquake earlywarning network that does not replace the standard net-
works but could be useful in some seismically active
places. More information about the technical develop-ment of the project can be found in the research paper,“MyShake: A smartphone seismic network for earth-
quake early warning and beyond,” Q. Kong, R. M.
Allen, L. Schreierand, and Y. Kwon, Sci. Adv. 2
(2),
e1501055 (2016). (A)
163. DECO (https://wipac.wisc.edu/deco ). Cosmic Rays.
The Distributed Cosmic-ray Observatory (DECO) is a
citizen science project led by Justin Vandenbroucke at
the University of Wisconsin–Madison supported by theNational Science Foundation and the AmericanPhysical Society, among others. The DECO app ena-bles users around the world to detect cosmic rays and
other energetic particles using the camera sensors of
their smartphones and tablets. The recorded events areautomatically uploaded to a central database. In addi-tion to detecting particle events, users can analyze the
data produced by their own or other users’ phones. This
work is described in the paper: “Particle identiﬁcation
342 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 342 04 October 2023 23:08:03
in camera image sensors using computer vision,”
Astropart. Phys. 104, 42–53 (2019). (A)
164. “Gravimetric detection of Earth’s rotation using crowd-
sourced smartphone observations,” S.F. Odenwald andC. M. Bailey, IEEE Access 7, 148131–148141 (2019).
The rotation of the Earth is detectable by means ofcrowdsourcing measurements of the slight changes inlocal gravity that can be detected by smartphone accel-
erometers. (I)
165. “Smartphone science: Apps test and track infectious
diseases,” S. Ravindran, Nature 593(7858), 302–303
(2021). An example of unexpected applications ofmobile-device technology. The less surprising one istracking of disease using geolocalization, but a moresurprising example is the use of the smartphone as atool to facilitate tests for certain diseases by means ofthe camera and the processor. (A)
XV. FINAL REMARKS
In the last few years, the use of smartphones and their sen-
sors has had a great impact on physics teaching. In thisResource Letter, we have concentrated on the application ofsensors available in a wide range of mobile devices, settingaside other uses such as access to information on the internet,preparation of presentations, exchange of ideas betweenpeers or with the teacher, and more.
It is our view that the most important characteristic in the
use of these devices and their sensors is their adaptability toa wide range of applications. While sensors are most easilyapplied to experiments in mechanics or waves, they can beused in every possible ﬁeld. They enable experiments illus-trating elementary concepts but also can be used in advanced
projects that require considerable mathematical and experi-
mental skills. While accelerometers are most commonlyused, the camera, microphone, and GPS locator are also fre-quently used, even though they do not fall within the usualdeﬁnition of a sensor. Some experiments are based on mea-suring scalar quantities, but others involve vectors, logicalvariables, or matrices. The software used, which works underdifferent operating systems, ranges from very elaborate pro-grams to simple applications, free or purchased. In somecases, data are transferred to a computer for processing; inothers, they are processed on the device itself. Many of theexperiments proposed are carried out in laboratories; how-ever, others are carried out outdoors, in amusement parks, oron means of transport. Some require laboratory materials or
equipment, while others can be carried out with material
available in many homes. There are many advantages to the
use of these sensors. Their wide availability is an importantfactor. Even in socially disadvantaged contexts there is usu-
ally access to mobile devices at no additional cost, while
access to traditional educational materials may be limited ornonexistent. Their portability and the convenience of having
multiple sensors in one device that communicate directly
with each other is another great advantage, allowing mea-surements and connections that would otherwise be difﬁcult
to achieve.
It is worth asking whether using the sensors in mobile
devices represents a signiﬁcative advance or only a marginalone. The same question could be asked about the use of
smartphones in other areas, and we believe the answers are
essentially the same: access to a set of resources in a singledevice, at an affordable price, and in a compact size, is, by
itself, a great advantage. The deﬁnitive answer will be pro-
vided by users themselves when they choose one alternativeor another.
There are many unknown factors to be faced in the coming
years. Mobile devices have incorporated sensors only over
the last decade. We do not know whether manufacturers will
continue to include new sensors, or whether their calculationcapacity will continue to increase at the same rate as in
recent years.
Perhaps, future advances will improve the ease of use of
software and data processing. Physics education researchalso has much to say, indicating whether future change will
be signiﬁcant or merely marginal, and in what aspects
improved learning outcomes will be noted. In any case, whatwe can state is that these devices and sensors are here to
stay. As with all new tools or technology that appear, the
best attitude seems to be to analyze their contributions anduse them critically and reﬂectively.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are very grateful to the anonymous reviewers
for their careful reading and thoughtful comments. The
authors appreciate their suggestions and have included many
of them in this Resource Letter.
a)Electronic mail: marti@ﬁsica.edu.uy
343 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 5, May 2022 M. Monteiro and A. C. Mart /C19ı 343 04 October 2023 23:08:03
