
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| JULY 01 2022
Resources-oriented instruction: What does it mean, and
what might it look like? 
Amy D. Robertson ; Lauren C. Bauman ; Yohannes M. Abraham ; Brynna Hansen ; Hung T ran; Lisa M. Goodhew
Am. J. Phys.  90, 529–537 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009796
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
There might be two kinds of dibaryon
AIP Conference Proceedings  (July 1995)
Why quantum mechanics might be wrong
Pulsating x ‐ ray source might be neutron star or black hole
Physics T oday  (June 1971) 04 October 2023 23:12:38
Resources-oriented instruction: What does it mean, and what might
it look like?
Amy D. Robertsona)
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
Lauren C. Bauman
Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195
Yohannes M. Abraham
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
Brynna Hansen
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
Hung Tran
School of STEM, University of Washington, Bothell, Washington 98011
Lisa M. Goodhew
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
(Received 31 March 2021; accepted 26 February 2022)
Resources-oriented instruction in physics treats student thinking as sensible and then seeks to
connect what students are saying and doing to physics content and practices. This paper uses anillustrative case to make progress toward answering the instructional questions: “What does
resources-oriented instruction in physics look like?” and “How can I do it?”. We analyze an
interaction between a university TA and a group of four introductory physics students completing aworksheet about mechanical wave propagation. We show some of the ways in which the TA’s
instructional moves supported students in making conceptual progress, even though several of the
students’ ideas would not be accepted as correct by many physicists.
#2022 Published under an exclusive
license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009796
I. INTRODUCTION
The resources theoretical framework1–4emerged in the
early 1990s, alongside and in conversation with misconcep-tions research.
5–7Whereas misconception research focused
on student ideas that were incorrect, positioning these ideasasbarriers to learning, resources theory framed student
thinking as fundamentally sensible and as including “seeds”or “beginnings” of formal physics reasoning, and thus inte-
gral to student learning.
In physics education research (PER), early misconcep-
tions- and difﬁculties-oriented work focused on identifyingstudent misunderstandings about a variety of physics topics
and on developing instructional materials that address the
misunderstandings identiﬁed (e.g., Refs. 8and 9). Early
resources research focused on illustrating theory with case
studies, showing, for example, that student thinking is
context-dependent and that students have conceptual and
epistemological resources for understanding physics.
3,10,11
This paper draws on resources theory to build instructor
awareness around a pragmatic instructional question, one
that is often asked of researchers doing resources theory
work in PER and one that has not yet been extensively
explored in physics.12That is: “What does resources-
oriented instruction look like?” and “How can I do it?” By
resources-oriented instruction, we mean instruction thattakes up the orientation toward student ideas reﬂected in the
resources framework. Resources-oriented instruction in
physics treats student thinking as sensible and then seeks tobuild bridges between what students are saying and physics
content and practices. It often relies on the assumptions thatstudents have good ideas and that students can make concep-
tual and epistemological progress on the basis of what they
already know and are doing, even if their ideas would not be
considered correct by many physicists.
13–15
In this paper, we use a case of resources-oriented instruc-
tion from an introductory physics course at a large university
to illustrate what this kind of instruction looks like, including
what kinds of instructional moves support it. We chose thiscase not only because it exempliﬁes what we think of as
resources-oriented instruction but also because it addresses
some of the concerns that we hear when we talk to instruc-
tors who are enthusiastic about resources-oriented instruction
but worried about their students’ learning.16For example,
instructors may ask, “What if students bring in incorrect
ideas? I care about my students arriving at correct physics
understandings.” Or in imagining resources-oriented instruc-
tion, they may think it is the job of the instructor to afﬁrm
every idea they hear, equally, in ways that don’t clearly draw
on their physics expertise.
The analysis in this paper responds to these concerns. The
focal episode shows students making conceptual progress in
their understanding of mechanical wave propagation. Thestudents’ TA afﬁrmed and built on students’ thinking—
including incorrect physics ideas—in ways that supported
this conceptual progress. We analyze the episode in detail in
Sec. III, and we summarize the students’ conceptual progress
and the TA moves that supported it in Fig. 3. The TA’s sup-
port relied on his own deep conceptual and epistemological
understandings and communicated the value he saw in stu-
dents’ ideas while also inviting them to be more speciﬁc or
clarify aspects of their thinking.
529 Am. J. Phys. 90(7), July 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 529 04 October 2023 23:12:38
II. INSTRUCTIONAL CONTEXT FOR FOCAL
EPISODE
The case we document here is drawn from an introductory
physics course at a large university in the Paciﬁc NorthwestU.S. The university is not representative of the U.S. in terms ofracial and/or ethnic demographics or wealth demographics, asdescribed in more detail in supplementary material.
17Though
this case study is meant to illustrate what is possible, which
does not require a representative sample, Kanim and Cid rightlypoint out that if physics education research continues to undersample from universities that serve Black, Latinx, andIndigenous groups, and/or students with less wealth, the results
of PER will continue to underserve these populations of stu-
dents.
18Our team is working to understand the relationship
between university- and course-level demographics to contrib-ute to the ﬁeld’s understanding of this dynamic.19
The episode we selected for this study took place in a
small-group session associated with the third quarter of the
calculus-based introductory physics course sequence, which
primarily serves engineering and physical science majorsand focuses on waves and optics. The weekly 50-min small-group sessions are a required part of the course. Typicallygroups of students work through one worksheet from
Tutorials in Introductory Physics.
20In this case, students
worked through the Representing Pulse Propagation work-
sheet, developed as part of a research grant focused on iden-tifying and building on students’ conceptual resources. Inour team’s research on common conceptual resources for
mechanical wave propagation,
21we noticed that students
often answered questions about mechanical wave propaga-tion by articulating what pulse propagation is,or by describ-
ing nascent models for pulse propagation. In response, wedesigned the Representing Pulse Propagation worksheet
(see the supplementary materials
17), whose objective was for
students to construct a model for mechanical pulse propaga-tion that could accurately predict and explain the outcome ofunfamiliar wave propagation experiments. There is no singlemodel toward which the worksheet scaffolds. Students some-
times use macroscopic models that focus on how changes to
the spring affect “resistance” to the pulse’s motion in thespring, and they sometimes use microscopic models that con-sider how changes to the spring affect the speed of a pointmoving up and then back down (and so on). The aim of the
worksheet is to support students in engaging in the process
of articulating and reﬁning a mechanism for pulse propaga-
tion that is predictive and explanatory.
22The interaction we focus on in this paper is an approxi-
mately-eight-minute interaction (full transcript available as
supplementary material17) between four students, Sal,Seth,
Song, and Sam (pseudonymed with names beginning with
“s” to indicate “students”), and the TA,Teddy (pseudo-
nymed with a name that begins with “t” to indicate “TA”).
Most of the interaction centered on the tension pulse ﬂick
question (Fig. 1), which asked why pulses move faster on
higher-tension springs. In the original research, this questionreliably elicited a variety of resources for understanding
pulse propagation, such as “the speed or duration of trans-
verse motion affects the speed of the pulse” and “the speed
of the pulse is affected by its energy.”21Before students
answered the ﬁrst question (Fig. 1), they observed a demon-
stration of the phenomenon of interest from their course
instructor.
Our model for mechanical pulse propagation is described
in detail in Goodhew et al.21To summarize: We model a
spring as a series of small beads connected by massless
strings of equal length and equal tension (see Fig. 2). In this
model, a propagating pulse is the sequential, transverse dis-
turbance and return to equilibrium of individual beads (or, in
the continuum limit, segments of the medium). The motion
of neighboring beads/parts is coupled by the tension between
them. Propagation speed, in this model, is determined by
properties of the medium that affect the transverse accelera-
tion of the small segments of the medium. We observe that
the pulse propagates without dispersion, so that it maintains
the same shape as it moves. Increasing tension increases the
magnitudes of the forces acting on a bead in a given location
within the pulse, which act in the directions handhþdh.
Thus, for a given difference in angle between the two tension
forces dh, the net force on the bead increases, causing a
larger acceleration, so each “bead” completes its displace-
ment and return to equilibrium more quickly, and the pulse
propagates faster.
We chose the focal episode in this paper for the reasons
stated in Sec. I: It exempliﬁes resources-oriented instruction
at the college level; it demonstrates that such instruction
relies on rich and deep physics understandings; and it shows
that students can make signiﬁcant conceptual progress in
resources-oriented instructional contexts. We analyzed the
transcript piece by piece using discourse analytic techniques,
which are meant to help analysts understand the meaning
that actors are making of their interactions.23In this paper,
we interpret what we think students meant and some of the
ways in which Teddy’s instructional moves seemed to shape
Fig. 1. The tension pulse-ﬂick question from the Representing Pulse Propagation worksheet. An audio description of the contents of this ﬁgure is provided
online in the multimedia. Multimedia view: https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009796.1
530 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 7, July 2022 Robertson et al. 530 04 October 2023 23:12:38
the conversation. We make the claim that Teddy’s questions
and revoicing of student ideas were integral to the students’progress. This is in some sense a causal claim and relies on a
process theory of cause, wherein cause is inferred by a visu-
alizable sequence of events that plausibly links local causesand effects.
24,25In this way of thinking about cause, “E, the
phenomenon to be explained, arose because D came before,
preceded by C, B, and A. If any of those earlier stages hadnot occurred, or had transpired in a different way, then E
would not exist or would be present in a substantially altered
form from E, requiring a different (but equally credible)explanation.”
26
In the remainder of the paper, our aim is to walk you through
the interaction, to show you how it is an example of resources-
oriented instruction as we have deﬁned it, and to suggest thatthis kind of instruction can support students in making progress
toward more sophisticated and more correct understandings.
Case studies that draw on process theories of cause produce
insights that are necessarily local; they are not reproducible in
that the same instructional moves may produce very differentoutcomes in another context. But that does not mean that the
insights do not generalize.
27–29In fact, they concretize broader
themes so that readers can expand their awareness of what ispossible and howcertain processes happen. Early work suggests
that our case is not unique, in that students do often make pro-
gress, but as they use this worksheet, their awareness of the pro-gress they are making seems to depend at least in part on the
instructional support they receive.
It is worth noting that the primary speakers in this episode
were Seth, Sal, and the TA; Song entered the discussion for ashort period, and Sam spoke very little. Our analysis has
been limited to the ways in which Teddy noticed and built
on the conceptual ideas being raised by the students. An
analysis of power or equitable team dynamics would cer-
tainly highlight different points, and may not position this as
an exemplary interaction.
30–32
III. RESOURCES-ORIENTED INSTRUCTION
IN INTRODUCTORY PHYSICS: AN EXAMPLEFROM WAVE MECHANICS
In this section, we document an example of resources-
oriented instruction, where a TA, Teddy, listened to and sup-
ported students in building on their ideas about mechanicalwave propagation. (Figure 3in Sec. IVsummarizes this
interaction.) In the three minutes preceding the interaction
we document, the students began the Representing Pulse
Propagation worksheet, answering the tension pulse ﬂick
question in Fig. 1. Seth talked ﬁrst, proposing that increasingthe tension stretches the spring out so that “there’s less mass
because the spring is less condensed.” Thus, the mass densityis less, such that “the force [the spring is] gonna exert tocounteract that wave motion is less.”
33Here we see Seth
drawing on the conceptual resource that lower mass densitymeans less force resisting the motion of the pulse,21almost
as though the pulse is an object moving through a medium
that has been made less dense.34
Sal answered, “that deﬁnitely makes sense,” and then
went on to propose a second explanation: that “the more tautthe spring,” the stronger the restoring force and thus thefaster the acceleration of the spring. As the students pausedto write their answers on the worksheet, Teddy, the TA,approached. He asked the group if they would share howthey were making sense of the demonstration from the startof class, which illustrated the phenomenon described in thetension pulse ﬂick question.
Seth was the ﬁrst to answer Teddy, recounting his mass
density explanation: pulling the spring means that the lengthis longer but the mass stays the same, so “mass per unit
length is less.” With a lower mass density, the “inertia of it is
going to be less resistive,” so the pulse will “travel quicker.”Seth’s explanation here includes several correct elements. Ifthe spring stretches under the increased tension, then itsmass density ldecreases, and the propagation speed v¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
T=lp
increases. In the language of our model above, the
inertial mass dmof each length dxis reduced, so the trans-
verse acceleration is increased, and the pulse propagatesmore quickly. However, Seth’s model cannot explain why apulse would propagate more quickly on a string whose massdensity is nearly unaffected by tension. Teddy revoicedSeth’s answer with discursive moves in the form of “Okay,so you said…” and “Okay, so…”.
Seth then brought in “particles” of the spring for the ﬁrst
time, saying that when the tension is increased:
“So, when the whoever, uh, hits the spring or
string, the individual particles…will be lessresistive to the force of the person so it willpropagate through the quickest.”
Teddy simply said, “Okay,” and Seth continued, bringing
in Sal’s explanation about the restoring force:
10. Seth: Yeah. And we also said, uh, when you
have a more tense string there’s going to be likestronger restoring force, so ummm then that forceis greater, so…since force equals mass timesacceleration, the acceleration will be fas—greater,and it will propagate quicker.
Fig. 2. String-and-bead model for pulse propagation. The transverse acceleration of each bead is due to the net force acting on it, which is the sum of th et r a n s v e r s e
components of two tension forces. It is assumed that the net force in the longitudinal direction is zero. An audio description of the contents of this ﬁg ure is provided
online in the multimedia. Multimedia view: https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009796.2
531 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 7, July 2022 Robertson et al. 531 04 October 2023 23:12:38
11. Teddy: Okay.
12. Sal: Are those valid points?13. Teddy: I mean that’s making sense to me. It
sounds like you’ve come up with some way ofkinda like explaining a correlation between…tension and higher wave speed.
14. [Seth and Teddy begin to talk at the same time,
Teddy signals for Seth to go ahead.]
15. Seth: I was going to ask a question but finish
what you were going to say.
16. Teddy: Oh, sure. I guess, ummmm, yeah.
Okay. So, what’s the restoring force here? Like,what’s the force that you’re thinking of? Likewhat’s Fequals ma?
17. Sal: I was thinking of like the force, uh, like, if
the-. It’s like a point on the wire displaced fromthe line, it’s like the force that like brings it back tothe line. And because the force is greater, theacceleration that will bring it up is greater.
18. Teddy: Okay, and increasing the tension means
that the force that brings it back to that equilibriumposition is greater?
19. [Sal nods]
In line 10, Seth offered Sal’s explanation to Teddy, layer-
ing on Newton’s second law: There will be a “strongerrestoring force” in a “more tense spring,” and a higher forcemeans a higher acceleration. At this stage, this explanationappears to be a macroscopic: The spring experiences a stron-
ger restoring force. Sal sought conﬁrmation from Teddy forthis answer, and Teddy responded by revoicing the activitythat the students were engaged in: They were coming upwith a way to explain the “correlation between…tensionand…wave speed.” Rather than conﬁrming or disconﬁrmingthe correctness of their answer, Teddy said “that’s making
sense to me.”
Teddy then (line 16) pressed the group for elaboration of
their thinking, using more technical physics language—spe-ciﬁcally, asking them what they are identifying as a restoringforce? This question prompted Sal to bring in the beginningsof a microscopic model for pulse propagation: The restoringforce is the force that brings displaced points on the wire
back to equilibrium. As the restoring force increases, Salsaid, “the acceleration that will bring it up is greater.” Wecall this the “beginnings of a microscopic model for pulsepropagation” because it names one step in a mechanisticchain:
35,36It explains the relationship between the tension
and the acceleration of a particle in the spring, but it does notyet state the connection between individual particles’ motionand the speed at which the disturbance propagates.
Teddy’s next question (line 18) further clariﬁed and con-
nected the students’ thinking to the physics canon:
“increasing the tension means the force that brings it back to
that equilibrium position is greater?” (emphasis ours,
highlighting what Teddy added). Seth answered Teddy,bringing in Hooke’s law:
20. Seth: We thought, like kx, y’know? Like by
increasing the tension you’d be like manipulatingthe negative kxthing, so like the negative k-constant would increase, so your force restoring it
would [signals up for increase].
21. Teddy: Okay, so we’re changing the k, that’s
how you’re thinking about it? …increasing thetension, you’re saying makes the kbigger.
22. Seth: Yeah.23. Teddy: Okay.24. Seth: Hmmmm. Actually, the problem with
that is, like, wouldn’t you have the same, like uh,wouldn’t that counteract-. It’d actually counteract,because you’d also be experiencing a greater forceby the wave propagating away from–, your, mini-mum. ‘Cause when you go this way [signalstoward the wall] you have like the force of thespring, like the restoring force counteracting yourmovement, so like if we were to increase that con-stant by like stretching it, then we’d have that
same, it’d like balance out, you know what I’m
saying? Because if there’s tension here and we’reexperiencing like a spring force from that Hooke’slaw, it’s going to exert a force that’s opposite of itsmotion since when you first hit it it’s moving thisway, you’re going to have a force going that waywhich would be slowing down the wave, and thenwhen it’s going back it’s going in the direction thisway so it’s increasing it, so it’s kinda like balanc-ing it out. Which is why I like kinda don’t know ifit makes sense.
In response to Teddy’s question (line 18), Seth connected
the tension in the spring to Hooke’s law. (We will get to hearmore about why Seth associated a higher tension with ahigher spring constant later.) Though the speciﬁc association(between Tandk) that Seth made is not particularly effective
for describing pulse propagation from a physics perspective,Teddy did not focus on this but instead revoiced Seth’s rea-soning and asked if he had heard Seth correctly: “increasingthe tension, you’re saying makes the k bigger.” He posed
this as a question: “that’s how you’re thinking about it?”
Importantly, Teddy neither suggested that this answer was
correct, nor did he step in to correct it.
This interaction made room for Seth to then identify a
vexation point (line 24), which Odden and Russ deﬁne as “acritical moment [in the sensemaking process] when the stu-dents articulate an inconsistency or gap in their understand-ing, the thing that doesn’t ‘make sense’ to them.”
37
Importantly, Odden and Russ ﬁnd that this moment often“kicks off the sensemaking frame,” where students“transition from recalling previously learned knowledge toactively building new knowledge or connections betweennew ideas.”
In line 24, Seth started to zoom out from (a) focusing
only on the pulse and the restoring force on the pulse to (b)talking about the spring and the phenomenon as a whole.When he said, “…when you go this way you have like theforce of the spring, like the restoring force counteracting
your movement,” we think he was referring to two forces:
(1) the force the hand exerts on the spring to create the pulse(“go this way” and “your movement”) and (2) the restoringforce of the spring. (It may be instead that he is talkingabout the transverse motion of points and the restoring forcethat pulls points back down to equilibrium.) He suggested
532 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 7, July 2022 Robertson et al. 532 04 October 2023 23:12:38
that these forces will “balance out,” and he was right, in a
sense; these two forces are a Newton’s third law pair, so
they areequal, even though they are being exerted on differ-
ent entities (one on the spring, the other on the hand). Afterthis point, we become less sure what he was referring to, but
what isclear is that he was naming something he was con-
fused about; he even said, “I like kinda don’t know if itmakes sense.” Teddy’s response was to again revoice what
Seth said rather than correct him, and then ask for
clariﬁcation:
25. Teddy: Okay, so I heard you mention a couple
of forces, specifically you talked about the tension
and the spring force. So, what are the forces here?
26. Seth: The wave force? The, like, pull?
27. Song: Isn’t that just tension?28. Seth: But there’s also the force that starts the
wave.
29. Teddy: Okay, so there’s something about
starting the wave. You asked, isn’t it just tension?
Ummmm, so we could look at like, just part of thespring, right? And ask like what are the forces on
it?
30. Song: So, like F¼/C0kx, and ummmm, even
though you probably displaced the same amount,so the xstays the same, but like umm but the
spring constant increased because the spring was
like harder.
31. Teddy: Okay, so like a more stretched spring is
kind of like a harder spring, you’re saying?
32. Song: Yes.33. Teddy: So, it’s going to like to bounce back
more. So, like also adding to that explanation forhow or why you’d expect kto change when you
change T.
Teddy’s question in line 29 brought Song into the conver-
sation in a substantive way for the ﬁrst time. When Sethresponded in line 26 that “the pull” (“wave force”) is the
force on the spring, Song asked, “Isn’t that just tension?”
and Seth answered that “there’s also the force that starts thewave.” Teddy revoiced their thinking in line 29, drawing
attention to Song’s question (“ youasked…,” emphasis ours),
and then narrowed the scope of his original question, invitingstudents to focus on “just part of the spring.” Teddy’s sug-
gestion here invited Song and Seth to look at the problem in
a formal physics way: He asked about a small part of the sys-tem that can be treated as a point-like object (e.g., Refs.
38–40 ).
Song then (line 30) revoiced and added to Seth’s earlier
reasoning about the relationship between increasing the ten-sion and changing the spring constant, saying “the spring
was like harder.” (He also associated x, the displacement in
Hooke’s law, with the displacement of the spring duringpulse generation.) Teddy (line 30) again revoiced and added,
saying “a more stretched spring is kind of like a harder
spring, you’re saying?” When Song agreed, Teddy namedthe knowledge-building activity students were engaging in:
They were explaining “how or why you’d expect kto change
when you change T.”Seth then began to articulate a second vexation point:
34. Seth: Okay, but now I’m, like, confused by
this. I can draw it [draws a circle, representing aunit of mass]. You have a unit of massrepresenting some point on the spring, when thewave is travelling this way [down the spring] it’s[unit of mass] going to go up and then like backdown, right?
35. Teddy: I agree. Yes.36. Seth: Okay, so as it’s travelling up it’s going to
be feeling the force of whatever the thing that hit itwas-.
37. Teddy: Uhhh.38. Seth: Or does that like not make sense?39. Teddy: Well how-, let’s see.40. Seth: Okay. Okay, I’ll skip over that part.41. Teddy: Like what is exerting the force?
42. Seth: I’ll skip over that part.
43. Teddy: You said-. This is an interesting point.
You’ve raised an interesting question in that youknow that it’s going to go up and down somehow,
and some force is going to do that. [few moments
of silence]
44. Seth: Okay. So maybe, what’s happening is
like you have like a chain of like particles, and theinitial force is going to knock this, like up here,right. And it’s going to be like that now, but theseare kind of connected and there’s going to betension between them, and that’s going to pull thisup, and this is going to end up here, and in sodoing, this is going to get pulled up and like downthe line as it’s pulling. So, the only force then islike this force in-between like individual particles,and if there’s more tension we’d have that like kx
relationship where kis increasing. So the force that
each individual particle is putting on each other is
larger, and since F¼ma, then mass stays the
same, but acceleration has to go up, so each one ofthese individual particles is going to acceleratefaster which allows the process of like pulling upto go faster.
Seth began articulating another vexation point (indicated
by “I’m, like, confused by this…”) in lines 34–36: As thewave propagates down the spring, a point on the springmoves up and down, and as it does it will be “feeling theforce of whatever the thing that hit it was…” We do not getto hear what Seth was “confused by” (line 34) because heseemed to perceive from Teddy that what he is saying “[did]not make sense.” When Seth offered to “skip over that part,”Teddy pressed him to continue, afﬁrming and revoicing theparts of Seth’s reasoning that Teddy understood: “You’ve
raised an interesting question in that you know that it’s going
to go up and down somehow, and some force is going to dothat.”
Seth did continue; after a short pause, he articulated a
microscopic model for pulse propagation that was more cor-rect than his earlier one from line 17. Here, Seth said that
533 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 7, July 2022 Robertson et al. 533 04 October 2023 23:12:38
“particles” in the string pull on one another, and increasing
the tension in the string increases the “force that each indi-vidual particle is putting on each other…so each one of theseindividual particles is going to accelerate faster which allowsthe process of…pulling up to go faster.” This mechanismbuilds from an individual particle moving up and down fasterin a higher-tension spring (earlier explanation) to a chain ofparticles that put forces on one another, making progresstoward an explanation that connects the transverse motion ofparticles in the spring to the forward propagation of thepulse. Further, as Seth explained his thinking, he notablytransitioned from describing an initial force that “knocks”the particles to describing pulling forces between particles.
Teddy then invited comments and additions from the
group:
45. Teddy: Okay. Is this making sense to other
people at the table?
46. Sal: Yeah, that makes sense.47. Teddy: Different thoughts? Additions?48. Sam: Are you talking about like…I didn’t
really understand the F¼ma…
49. Seth: Ok, if you imagine the string, the string is
easier to think about, for me at least, and that’salso what this one says. If you think about thestring as like a whole bunch of smaller particles,they start [Teddy slowly walks away] off like thatbasically [pointing to a drawing of connectedparticles in a neutral position, y¼0], and what
happens is you apply an initial force at the top, butthat force isn’t propagating through. What happensis you apply the force then this moves here [pointsto first particle, indicates moving up], andessentially that force you applied is no longerrelevant, it’s done, but because it’s here [in araised position] there’s going to be like these unitsof mass are all connected, so it’s kinda like that,pulled up here so you can ignore that part of it.There’s tension between those two units of mass[first two particles in drawing]…
50. Sam: It’s like stretched out more?51. Seth: …and we know that Hooke’s law is the
negative kxrelationship, and since it’s here it’s
going to put a force on it which pulls it upwards.So, you have that force of one unit pulling it upand then it like keeps going all the way through.And since force is equal to kxand we’ve increased
kthen the force is increasing. Because what
tension does is it increased the hardness, like yousaid, or like tension in the string. Ummm, so likenow the force is greater, and since the force isgreater, the acceleration of each particle has toincrease so like the whole process now, like eachthing is accelerating faster, so it goes-.
52. Sam: Ok.53. Sal: Are you good with that?54. Sam, Song: Yeah.55. Seth: I think the assumption is, or like the
mechanism is like everything is operating likesmaller particles and they’re all affected by each
other.
56. Song: Yeah.
In this ﬁnal exchange, Sam asked clarifying questions
about the mechanism that Seth proposed, and Seth explained
his thinking in more detail. His ﬁnal explanation included
multiple correct elements that we see coalescing toward auseful and more complete mechanism, even if not all theway there yet. Here, Seth noted that the role of the initialhand force is to pull up on the particles at the end of the
spring, and is then “no longer relevant,” which feels to us
like a resolution of the vexation he articulated in line 24 (i.e.,whether the pulse-generating force and the restoring forceco-exist/balance in the spring). The pieces pull on oneanother “and then it keeps going all the way through.”
Though incorrect, he brought into coherence the group’s
thinking about Hooke’s law: Increasing the tension increasesk, since the spring is harder.
41They ended this dialogue with
a statement of their mechanism in line 55: “everything isoperating like smaller particles and they’re all affected by
each other.” This mechanism builds even further toward the
correct mechanism than earlier ones the students articulatedby emphasizing that the particles in the spring pull on oneanother as they move up and down, which is an additional
piece in the chain connecting higher tension to higher pulse
propagation down the spring.
The group went on to use this mechanism to make predic-
tions about what would happen if the mass of the springchanged, and then if they ﬂicked the pulse faster. They con-tinued to name and then sense-make about vexation points as
they went.
A. Summary
In this extended interaction, we see Teddy engaged in
resources-oriented instruction. This kind of instruction treatsstudent thinking as sensible and seeks to build on the connec-tions between students’ ideas and accepted physics explana-
tions. Teddy routinely chose not to correct student thinking
and instead revoiced it and asked questions that clariﬁed orpressed students to be more speciﬁc or more concrete. Teddy’squestions often pointed to something students were alreadydoing—naming forces, articulating a relationship—and then
a s k e dt h e mt oe x t e n dt h a tt h i n k i n go rb e c o m em o r es p e c i ﬁ c —
which forces, on what parts of the spring. This was not obser-vational listening, which Empson and Jacobs deﬁne as“listening with an attempt to hear the [student’s] thinking butwith nascent formulations about what is heard and few active
attempts to support or extend that thinking.”
42It was not
“anything goes” or “everything’s great.” Teddy actively inter-vened to guide the students’ thinking, and his responses reliedon and reﬂected (i) careful attention to what the students weresaying and (ii) ﬂexibly-deployed knowledge of physics content
and practices. In our view, students made signiﬁcant progress
in and through this interaction; we’ll brieﬂy recap this next.
IV. STUDENTS’ CONCEPTUAL PROGRESS IN
RESOURCES-ORIENTED INSTRUCTION
In this extended, 8-min interaction, we see students’ ideas
progressing toward more sophisticated, mechanistic, canoni-
cally correct understandings of mechanical wave propagation.
We summarize the progression in their thinking in Fig. 3.
534 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 7, July 2022 Robertson et al. 534 04 October 2023 23:12:38
Like most forms of collaborative learning, the progression of
this group’s thinking was nonlinear. However, Fig. 3makes
visible that the TA’s instructional moves played a role in howtheir ideas unfolded and that the students’ model for pulse
propagation became increasingly speciﬁc and integrated
more abstract and mechanistic representations for motion.For most of the interaction, the group iterated on Sal’s
(line 10) restoring force idea, which was originally framedmacroscopically as “the restoring force goes up, so the
(unspeciﬁed) acceleration goes up.” When asked by Teddy
which force they were thinking of, Sal (line 12) brought in a
microscopic deﬁnition: The restoring force is the force that
brings displaced points on the spring “back to the line.”
Whereas Seth (line 20) answered the same question—Whichforce is the restoring force?—with a relationship: It’s “ kx.”
Both Sal’s and Seth’s latter responses were more mechanis-
tic than their previous ones.
35,36Here, Sal and Seth moved
from “higher tension means higher restoring force whichmeans more acceleration” to articulating a means by whichthe restoring force translates into higher acceleration (Sal)
and describing the restoring force more speciﬁcally (Seth).
The former explanation connected higher tension to highertransverse acceleration of points on the spring, but did notyet articulate a relationship between the transverse accelera-
tion of points on the spring and the horizontal motion of the
pulse, nor did it highlight the relationship between parts ofthe spring—students seemed to be focused on the up-and-down motion of a single point.
As Seth continued to get clearer and more speciﬁc in his
thinking, he named a vexation point (line 24), which we see
as part of his sorting through his thinking about the role ofthe hand force in the propagation of the pulse. Teddy’sresponse—to ask the group to name the forces on the spring
and then on a part of the spring—pressed the students to
issue explanations that were even more mechanistic thanbefore. Seth’s (line 20) reasoning about the relationshipbetween increasing tension and increasing kwas deepened
by Song (line 30): increasing tension makes the spring
“harder,” which corresponds to a higher k. And Seth (lines
34, 36) began really parsing the relevant forces (lines 26,
28), identifying a relationship between the transverse dis-
placement of the points on the spring and the forward propa-gation of the wave. Teddy’s revoicing of Seth’s reasoning—“you know that it’s going to go up and down somehow, and
some force is going to do that”—prompted Seth’s pulling
everything together into a microscopic mechanism for pulsepropagation that included particles pulling on one another,such that increased tension means increased pulling and
faster propagation.
In this, we see movement from ambiguity to clarity,
toward more mechanistic, more canonically correct reason-ing. (Though not yet completely correct; students stillseemed to think that increasing tension increases the spring
constant.) As the students became more speciﬁc, they named
(and then resolved) places of confusion, added pieces to theirmodel, and used physics language. We see this progress asshaped by—indeed, inseparable from—the questions Teddy
asked, which often pressed for speciﬁcity, reﬂected back stu-
dents’ thinking in physics language, and encouraged episte-mic practices like sense-making that are thought to becentral to productive physics engagement. Importantly, stu-
dents made progress toward more correct answers without
being corrected; indeed, Teddy revoiced and gave attention
toideas that were incorrect throughout.
V. CONCLUSION
We said at the start of this paper that our aim was to
answer a pragmatic instructional question: What doesresources-oriented instruction look like, and how can I do it?
Fig. 3. Progression in students’ ideas over eight-minute classroom interac-
tion. Embedded ﬁgures are our (analysts’) best guesses as to what students
mean. The underlined text indicates the instructor move we see the Teddy
employing. Highlighted text indicates connections between TA’s response
and students’ next ideas. The color of the highlighting (online only) tracks
which TA response maps to which student response. An audio description of
the contents of this ﬁgure is provided online in the multimedia. Multimedia
view: https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009796.3
535 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 7, July 2022 Robertson et al. 535 04 October 2023 23:12:38
The focal episode in this paper is one example of what
resources-oriented instruction can look like, including con-crete examples of discursive moves an instructor might makeas they try on this kind of instruction.
43–45Table Isumma-
rizes the discursive moves made by Teddy, which couldserve as a guide for instructors who want to test outresources-oriented instruction.
This case may support instructors who ask, “What if stu-
dents bring in incorrect ideas? I care about my students arriv-ing at correct physics understandings,” by suggesting thatstudents can make conceptual progress during resources-oriented instruction, even when they begin with ideas thatwould not be seen as correct by many physicists, and evenwhen their instructor does not directly intervene to correctthese ideas.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Science
Foundation under Grant Nos. 1608510, 1608221, 1914603,1914572, and 1256082. All opinions are the authors’ own.The authors are grateful for feedback from collaboratorsCheyenne Broadfoot, Paula Heron, Katherine Marvin,Clausell Mathis, Raphael Mondesir, and Rachel Scherr.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
a)Electronic mail: robertsona2@spu.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-9307-2681.
1D. Hammer, “Student resources for learning introductory physics,” Am. J.
Phys. 68, S52–S59 (2000).
2D. Hammer, A. Elby, R. E. Scherr, and E. F. Redish, “Resources, framing,
and transfer,” in Transfer of Learning from a Modern Multidisciplinary
Perspective , edited by J. P. Mestre (Information Age Publishing, Inc.,
Charlotte, 2005), pp. 89–119.
3A. A. diSessa, “Toward an epistemology of physics,” Cognit. Instr. 10,
105–225 (1993).
4J. P. Smith III, A. A. diSessa, and J. Roschelle, “Misconceptions recon-ceived: A constructivist analysis of knowledge in transition,” J. Learn. Sci.
3, 115–163 (1993).5G. J. Posner, K. A. Strike, P. W. Hewson, and W. A. Gertzog,
“Accommodation of a scientiﬁc conception: Toward a theory of concep-tual change,” Sci. Educ. 66, 211–227 (1982).
6M. McCloskey, “Intuitive physics,” Sci. Am. 248, 124–130 (1983); avail-
able at https://www.academia.edu/28201242/Intuitive_Physics .
7L. McDermott, “A view from physics,” in Toward a Scientiﬁc Practice of
Science Education , edited by M. Gardner (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah, 1990), pp. 3–30.
8K. Wosilait, P. R. L. Heron, P. S. Shaffer, and L. C. McDermott,“Development and assessment of a research-based tutorial on light andshadow,” Am. J. Phys. 66, 906–913 (1998).
9L. C. McDermott and P. S. Shaffer, “Research as a guide for curriculum
development: An example from introductory electricity. Part I: Investigation
of student understanding,” A m .J .P h y s . 60, 994–1003 (1992).
10D. Hammer, “Epistemological beliefs in introductory physics,” Cognit.
Instr. 12, 151–183 (1994).
11L. Lising and A. Elby, “The impact of epistemology on learning: A case
study from introductory physics,” Am. J. Phys. 73, 372–382 (2005).
12There have been several case studies that illustrate what we would con-
sider to be resources-oriented instruction in science (Refs. 14and46). Few
of these have focused on college-level instruction with instructors who arenew to resources-oriented instruction, and we ﬁnd that sharing these exem-plars with novice university-level instructors often raises questions about
what this would look like (or if it’s even possible) in a university class-
room. This paper is meant to supplement—not replace—this existing bodyof literature.
13D. Hammer and E. van Zee, Seeing the Science in Children’s Thinking:
Case Studies of Student Inquiry in Physical Science (Heinemann, London,
2006).
14D. Hammer, F. Goldberg, and S. Fargason, “Responsive teaching and thebeginnings of energy in a third grade classroom,” Rev. Sci. Math. ICTEduc. 6, 51–72 (2012); available at https://dl.tufts.edu/pdfviewer/
pg15bs47t/xk81jz22n .
15E. Duckworth, The Having of Wonderful Ideas’ and Other Essays on
Teaching and Learning (Teachers College Press, New York, 2006).
16A. D. Robertson and L. J. Atkins Elliott, “Truth, success, and faith: Novice
teachers’ perception of what is at risk in responsive teaching,” Sci. Educ.
104, 736–741 (2020).
17See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/10.0009796 for detailed sample demographics, copies of the
instructional materials students were using, and a full transcript.
18S. Kanim and X. C. Cid, “The demographics of physics educationresearch,” Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 16, 020106 (2020).
19R. Mondesir and A. D. Robertson, “Towards characterizing the demo-
graphics of introductory physics courses,” in 2020 Physics Education
Research Conference Proceedings , edited by S. Wolf, E. Bennett, and B.
Frank (published online, 2020).Table I. Teddy’s instructional moves.
Instructor moves Example
Afﬁrming “I mean that’s making sense to me” (line 13)
“I agree. Yes.” (line 35)
Revoicing “…increasing the tension, you’re saying makes the k bigger.” (line 21)Connecting to physics
language or deﬁnitions“Okay, and increasing the tension means that the force that brings it back to that equilibrium position is greater?” (line 18)
Naming/reﬂecting activity
students are engaged in“So, like also adding to that explanation for how or why you’d expect kto change when you change T.” (line 33)
Narrowing focus “…so we could look at like, just part of the spring, right? And ask…what are the forces on it?” (line 29)
Asking for clariﬁcation/
pressing for elaboration“So, what’s the restoring force here? Like, what’s the force you’re thinking of?” (line 16)
“Okay, so I heard you mention a couple of forces… So, what are the forces here?” (line 25)
Inviting dialogue “Different thoughts? Additions?” (line 47)
536 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 7, July 2022 Robertson et al. 536 04 October 2023 23:12:38
20L. C. McDermott, P. S. Shaffer, and Physics Education Group, Tutorials in
Introductory Physics (Prentice Hall College Division, Hoboken, 2011).
21L. M. Goodhew, A. D. Robertson, P. R. L. Heron, and R. E. Scherr,
“Student resources for understanding mechanical wave propagation,”
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 15, 020127 (2019).
22The sequence of this worksheet is similar in structure to the Interactive
Science Learning Environment (ISLE) learning approach (Ref. 47)i n
that it asks students to observe a phenomenon, generate various explana-tions, and then design experiments to test their explanations. Like ISLE,
theRepresenting Pulse Propagation worksheet emphasizes participation
in the process of science (particularly constructing and testing explana-tions). This worksheet is distinct in that it leverages research-validatedresources associated with student models for pulse propagation to moreexplicitly scaffold the construction of an explanation beforeexperimentation.
23B. Jordan and A. Henderson, “Interaction analysis: Foundations andpractice,” J. Learn. Sci. 4, 39–103 (1995).
24J. A. Maxwell, “Using qualitative methods for causal explanation,” Field
Methods 16, 243–264 (2004).
25J. A. Maxwell, “Causal explanation, qualitative research, and scientiﬁc
inquiry in education,” Educ. Res. 33, 3–11 (2004).
26S. J. Gould, Wonderful Life (Norton, New York, 1989).
27F. Erickson, “Qualitative methods in research on teaching,” in Handbook
of Research on Teaching , edited by M. C. Wittrock (Macmillan,
New York, 1986), pp. 119–161.
28M. Eisenhart, “Generalization from qualitative inquiry,” in Generalizing
from Educational Research: Beyond Qualitative and QuantitativePolarization , edited by K. Ercikan and W.-M. Roth (Routledge, New
York, 2009), pp. 51–66.
29G. Wehlage, “The purpose of generalization in ﬁeld study research,” in
The Study of Schooling , edited by T. Papkewitz and B. Tabchmie (Praeger,
New York, 1981), pp. 211–226.
30R. A. Engle, J. M. Langer-Osuna, and M. M. de Royston, “Toward amodel of differential inﬂuence in persuasive discussions: Negotitatingquality, authority, privilege, and access within a student-led argument,”
Cognit. Instr. 23, 245–268 (2014).
31“Introduction,” in Critical Race Theory: The Key Writings That Formed
the Movement , edited by K. Crenshaw, N. Gotanda, G. Peller, and K.
Thomas (The New Press, New York, 1995), pp. xiii–xxxii.
32P. H. Collins, Black Feminist Thought (Routledge, New York, 2000).
33Bracketed words in the transcript indicate our insertions often nonverbal
information or references that we think are relevant. Dashes indicate unﬁn-ished words. … indicates removed transcript, typically when students
repeated themselves (e.g., “force of, uh, force of tension” would become
“force of tension”).34M. C. Wittmann, “Object coordination class applied to waves pulses:
Analysing student reasoning in wave physics,” Int. J. Sci. Educ. 24,
97–118 (2002).
35R. S. Russ, J. E. Coffey, D. Hammer, and P. Hutchison, “Making class-
room assessment more accountable to scientiﬁc reasoning: A case for
attending to mechanistic thinking,” Sci. Educ. 93, 875–891 (2009).
36R. S. Russ, R. E. Scherr, D. Hammer, and J. Mikeska, “Recognizing mech-
anistic reasoning in student scientiﬁc inquiry: A framework for discourse
analysis developed from philosophy of science,” Sci. Educ. 92, 499–525
(2008).
37T. O. B. Odden and R. S. Russ, “Charges are everywhere’: A case of stu-
dent sensemaking about electric current,” in 2017 Physics Education
Research Conference Proceedings , edited by L. Ding, A. L. Traxler, and
Y. Cao (AIP, New York, 2018), pp. 280–283.
38A. P. French, Vibrations and Waves (W. W. Norton & Company,
New York, 1971).
39E. Mazur, C. H. Crouch, D. Pedigo, P. A. Dourmashkin, and R. J. Bieniek,Principles & Practice of Physics (Pearson, London, 2015).
40J. R. Taylor, Classical Mechanics (University Science Books, Sausalito,
California, 2005).
41Students’ analysis of Hooke’s law here relies on kincreasing, rather than
x. Their reasoning is that a higher-tension spring is “harder,” which, in
their thinking, means a different k.This makes sense to us: kis often
described as how stiff a spring is. That’s part of w /C22ohy we aren’t worried
about it, even though it’s technically incorrect. Also, it’s not central to themechanism that they land on, which is that “everything is operating like
smaller particles and they’re all affecting each other.” This mechanism
doesn’t rely on a correct.
42S. B. Empson and V. R. Jacobs, “Learning to listen to children’s math-ematics,” in Tools and Processes in Mathematics Teacher Education , edited
by D. Tirosh and T. Wood (Sense Publishers, Rotterdam, 2008), pp. 257–281.
43J. E. Lineback, “The redirection: An indicator of how teachers respond to
student thinking,” J. Learn. Sci. 24, 419–460 (2015).
44K. Brodie, “Working with learners’ mathematical thinking: Towards a lan-
guage of description for changing pedagogy,” Teach. Teach. Educ. 27,
174–186 (2011).
45M. Lau, “Understanding the dynamics of teacher attention: Examples ofhow high school physics and physical science teachers attend to student
ideas,” Ph.D. dissertation (University of Maryland, College Park, MD,2010).
46D. M. Levin, D. Hammer, A. Elby, and J. Coffey, Becoming a Responsive
Science Teacher: Focusing on Student Thinking in Secondary Science
(National Science Teachers Association Press, Arlington, 2012).
47E. Etkina, D. M. Brookes, and G. Planinsic, Investigative Science
Learning Environment: When Learning Physics Mirrors Doing Physics
(Morgan & Claypool Publishers, San Rafael, California, 2019).
537 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 7, July 2022 Robertson et al. 537 04 October 2023 23:12:38
