
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| JUNE 01 2023
Sarah Frances Whiting, pioneer of laboratory instruction in
astronomy 
Joanna Behrman
Am. J. Phys.  91, 417 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0131617
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Sarah Frances Whiting: A foremother of American women physicists
Am. J. Phys.  (November 2005)
Sarah Frances Whiting
Sarah Frances Whiting and the “photography of the invisible”
Physics T oday  (August 2020) 04 October 2023 22:52:39
Sarah Frances Whiting, pioneer of laboratory instruction in astronomy
Joanna Behrmana)
Center for History of Physics, American Institute of Physics, 1 Physics Ellipse, College Park, Maryland 20740
(Received 22 October 2022; accepted 30 March 2023)
Sarah Frances Whiting developed innovative and inﬂuential laboratory work in her introductory
astronomy classes at Wellesley College in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Whiting was stronglyinﬂuenced by Edward Pickering and the early physics laboratory education at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. This article explores the early development of laboratory work in astronomy
education at Wellesley and Whiting’s underlying philosophy of education. By laboratory work,
Whiting meant day-time work, including work with astronomical photographs and spectroscopy. Her
pedagogy was encapsulated in her phrase “to sharpen the pencil sharpens the mind,” whichreferenced the importance of a student’s familiarity with tools as well as the role of drawing in
astronomical work. Whiting further modeled her instruction after the work being conducted at the
Harvard College Observatory in order to prepare her students for potential future employment asastronomers.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0131617
I. INTRODUCTION
Sarah Frances Whiting has been justly called a
“foremother of American women physicists” for her con-struction of an inﬂuential and innovative physics departmentat Wellesley College.
1After the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), Wellesley College was one of the earliestinstitutions in the United States to develop undergraduateteaching laboratories in 1878—in large part because ofWhiting.
2Her development of astronomical education was
equally as inﬂuential and innovative as her work in physics,
and some of her students, like Annie Jump Cannon, went onto become famous astronomers in their own right. This arti-cle examines the early development of astronomy educationat Wellesley, in particular, Whiting’s creation of a laboratoryastronomy course, modeled after the working practices at theHarvard College Observatory. Whiting’s pedagogicalapproach was at the forefront of laboratory education in theUnited States, and she used the new educational movementas a way to prepare her students for future employment asastronomers.
II. SARAH FRANCES WHITING AND THE
“NEW EDUCATION”
Sarah Frances Whiting, the ﬁrst professor of physics at
Wellesley College, was born in 1846 and was involved ineducation from an early age. She helped her father, whoworked as the principal of several academies
3in New York,
by setting up natural philosophical demonstrations. Theapparatus included “a provoking electrical machine, a leakyair pump, and a few bottles of chemicals.”
4After her 1864
graduation from Ingham University, an institution for wom-en’s higher education in Le Roy, New York, she taught atthat institution and later at Brooklyn Heights Seminary.
5She
specialized in teaching mathematics and the classics butbecame increasingly interested in astronomy and natural phi-losophy after attending multiple public scientiﬁc lectures.
1
Natural philosophy was very similar to our modern-day con-cept of physics in that it encompassed the study of the work-ings of the physical universe, although it had some keydifferences such as the essential role and visibility of adivine being in those workings.Whiting came to Wellesley in 1876 at the invitation of the
college’s founder, Henry Fowle Durant. The college wasfounded in what is now Wellesley, Massachusetts, nearBoston, as a ﬁrst-rate college for women, with an all-femaleprofessoriate. In the late 19th and early 20th century, the col-lege tended to draw its largely white student body from themiddle and upper classes, similar to other elite women’s col-leges. However, not all U.S. women’s colleges committed toan all-female faculty, and even fewer also committed to anacademic curriculum comparable to—or exceeding—that ofmen’s colleges. Wellesley quickly distinguished itself amongits peer group by its commitment to academic (and espe-cially scientiﬁc) excellence.
6
Whiting credited Durant with wanting to bring the study
of science to the forefront in the college:
Wellesley’s attitude during this scientifico-classic
warfare, as it was called, under Mr. Durant’s lead-ership was to hold fast the old good while graspingthe new. By sheer personal influence he set all theFreshmen to studying Greek, and at the same timefinanced such equipments for the scientific depart-ments, and inspired the training of teachers inmethods which would put Wellesley in the frontrank in the new learning.
7
During the ﬁrst half of the 1800s, classical studies were
more commonly part of a boy’s education and preparationfor study in men’s colleges. In contrast, science was morecommonly taken by girls, although for both boys and girls atthat time science education included demonstrations but nolaboratory work.
8Durant’s emphasis on the classics as well
as laboratory education for female students was quite pro-gressive at that time. Whiting recalled that he “did notbelieve that higher education for women should be anythingbut the highest, no ﬂinching at absolute scholarship, no‘Greek without the accent,’ nor ‘History taught from astrictly feminine point of view.’ Wellesley was to be a col-lege for women rather than a woman’s college.”
2By this,
Whiting (and Durant) likely meant that no subject would besimpliﬁed because the students were women, which wassometimes intentionally implied when an individual referredto a women’s college.
417 Am. J. Phys. 91(6), June 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 417 04 October 2023 22:52:39
Durant had become an advocate for the new laboratory
pedagogy through his acquaintance with Eben NortonHorsford. Horsford was the Rumford Professor and the ﬁrst
director of the Lawrence Scientiﬁc School at Harvard
University and had made his fortune from his invention of abaking powder using acid phosphate, today also called cal-cium biphosphate. (It is still known today as RumfordBaking Powder.) Horsford was an early supporter of teach-ing laboratories and a major benefactor of women’s science
education at Wellesley. His support of laboratory education
and research was cultivated at the University of Giessenfrom 1844 to 1846, where he was the second American stu-dent of Justus Liebig. Liebig is well known for heading a dis-tinctive teaching and research school in which he
incorporated research topics he was interested in as part of
the students’ education. As the number of students he super-vised grew, the research tasks became more systematic andprocedural; in essence, they became the basis of teachinglaboratories, particularly by the time of Horsford’s atten-dance. As for his support for women in science, one of
Horsford’s ﬁrst appointments was as a teacher of science at
Albany Female Academy,
9and while at the University of
Giessen, he particularly bemoaned the lack of contact withwomen at the male-dominated laboratory:
Of men I see enough. Of cultivated females none,
or next to none. Oh! Thou Siberia of refined life,thou Hessia. Is science susceptible to cultivation
only with the erection of this great chasm between
males and females? I will not believe it.
10
Horsford became a great benefactor of the Wellesley sci-
ence departments, making possible the purchase of equip-ment and endowing the college so that department headscould take the occasional sabbatical.
11
Horsford’s inﬂuence on laboratory education at Wellesley
was matched by Edward Pickering’s at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Where Horsford was a ﬁnancial ben-
efactor and mentor for Whiting’s networking among scien-tists, Pickering offered an educational model that Whitingcould emulate. When Whiting joined Wellesley in 1876, shehad much experience with teaching but not in the new labora-tory pedagogy. Durant connected Whiting to Pickering, and,
as she began her physics teaching at Wellesley, Whiting also
commuted to Pickering’s classes at MIT four days a week tolearn more physics as well as his methods of instruction.
12
Physics teaching laboratories likely began in United States
higher education at MIT.13MIT’s founder William Barton
Rogers sought to create the new institution’s pedagogy as a
melding of scientiﬁc theory with practical subjects and appli-
cations, which became known as the “new education.” ForRogers, teaching laboratories aptly brought together theoryand hands-on practice. Pickering, who succeeded Rodgers in1868 as MIT’s head professor of physics, is perhaps betterknown for his later work as the head of the Harvard College
Observatory. However, his years as an instructor at MIT
were formative to the physics curriculum there.
The building up of teaching laboratories was slowed by
the need for money with which to acquire equipment; MIT’sﬁrst teaching laboratory, in chemistry, was established in1867. Pickering opened the physics teaching laboratory at
MIT in Fall 1869.
14Four years later, he published Elements
of Physical Manipulation , one of the ﬁrst physics laboratory
manuals ever written based on his teaching of the laboratorycourse at MIT, which became very widely used.15
Pickering’s manual included exercises in methods of mea-
surement using various apparatus and in testing those same
apparatus (their beneﬁts, limitations, potential sources of
error, etc.), in addition to the usual subject areas likemechanics, sound, and light. The exercises differ from whatmight be seen in modern day laboratory manuals in that theyoften center on building familiarity with a particular scien-tiﬁc instrument. For example, the “daylight photometer”
exercise ﬁrst introduced the photometer’s construction, pur-
pose, usage, and possible problems. Pickering then suggestedand described an “excellent experiment… [measuring] thefading of the light at twilight” (p. 134 of Ref. 15). Whiting
used Pickering’s manual in her physics classes at Wellesley,one of which is shown in Fig. 1, and, as will be discussed,
shared a similar interest in building facility with apparatus.
III. ASTRONOMY TEACHING LABORATORIES
AT WELLESLEY
A. Development of the laboratory course
When Wellesley was ﬁrst opened for the 1876–1877 aca-
demic year, students were offered elective courses in
“Mathematical Astronomy” or “Astronomy.” The formercourse was eventually renamed “Theoretical Astronomy” andwas taught by the mathematics department and later by theapplied mathematics department. The latter course, soonrenamed “Physical Astronomy,” was taught by Whiting and
developed into the astronomy laboratory class. Although it
was initially conducted only via lectures,
16just three years
later, the course catalog advertised observations with the tele-scope and a focus on spectroscopic astronomy.17The ﬁrst
mention of the word “laboratory” is in the 1886–1887 catalog:
The [astronomy] lectures are illustrated by lantern-
slides, charts, and globes, and are accompanied by
frequent observation of the heavens with a four-
and-a-half inch telescope. Spectroscopic astronomyis illustrated by laboratory work sufficient to showsome of the methods of the new astronomy.
18
When the Whitin Observatory was erected at Wellesley in1900, the course catalog could advertise it as the new homefor laboratory work in astronomy:
Ample opportunity for laboratory work is offered by
the Whitin Observatory, where dome, transit, andspectroscope room are provided with instruments
from the best makers for both the astronomy of
measurement and astro physics.
19
Whiting was aided in her instruction by students entering
her class having taken some set of courses in common. FromWellesley’s founding until 1893, physics was a requiredjunior year class for all students, and after 1893, Whitingusually still required a year of physics as a prerequisite to the
Physical Astronomy course.
20Having taken a physics course
did not mean that students had seen or learned about spec-troscopy in any depth, but at least they had already beenintroduced to laboratory work and wave phenomena throughstudies of light and sound.
21
The Physical Astronomy course remained a part of the
Department of Physics and Physical Astronomy until the
1904–1905 academic year, when the Department split into
separate departments of physics and astronomy, and all the
418 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Joanna Behrman 418 04 October 2023 22:52:39
astronomy-related courses of the Department of Applied
Mathematics were brought into the fold of the Department ofAstronomy.22Nearing her retirement, Whiting wrote to
Philip Fox, then secretary of the AAS, “Mr [John Charles]
Duncan is to take up my work at Wellesley. I believe he will,with Miss [Leah Brown] Allen, keep up the good numbers inthe classes at Wellesley, and the teaching by the laboratory
method.”23Unfortunately, after Whiting retired in 1916, the
single introductory class in Physical Astronomy split into
two introductory classes, only one of which incorporated lab-
oratory work, the other being purely descriptive.24Figure 2
shows one of these new classes in 1917.
Fig. 1. Sarah Frances Whiting and her physics class, circa 1895–1896. Whiting is seated in the center, the fourth from the left. Annie Jump Cannon is the third
from the left. On the table is a prism spectroscope. Image courtesy Wellesley College Archives, Library & Technology Services.
Fig. 2. An astronomy class at Wellesley College, 1917. The blackboard has an exercise written out entitled “The moon’s geocentric orbit.” Image court esy
Wellesley College Archives, Library & Technology Services.
419 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Joanna Behrman 419 04 October 2023 22:52:39
B. The importance of spectroscopy and knowledge
of instruments
Finding equipment for the laboratories in the 1870s and
1880s was difﬁcult, as not many specialized equipment man-ufacturers were yet well-established in the United States. Soinstead of ordering from catalogs, Whiting attended the for-tuitously timed 1876 Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia,accompanied by George Frederic Barker, then a professor ofphysics at the University of Pennsylvania.
25The exhibition
was attended by around 10 /C2106people, which was approx-
imately one ﬁfth of the population of the United States at the
time. Although Whiting had had experience in the construc-tion of natural philosophical demonstration equipment, theaccompaniment was no doubt helpful as many instrumentson display at the exhibition had no explanatory labels andwere not necessarily accompanied by attendants.
26At the
Exhibition, Whiting met with numerous foreign instrumentmanufacturers and purchased equipment from them to beused for lecture demonstrations.
27Around this time, Whiting
also visited physics departments at northeastern men’s col-
leges to observe their methods of education and to consult on
their equipment. In addition to her separate study at MIT,she visited the Stevens Institute of Technology, theUniversity of Pennsylvania, Yale University, AmherstCollege, Harvard University, and Bowdoin College.
12She
frequently solicited advice from, and occasionally accompa-niment by, other male physics professors (reﬂecting thesocial conventions of the time). In contrast, her studentswould graduate from Wellesley with greater independence
than Whiting had had in her early career by already having
informed opinions on the relative virtues of different instru-ment makers.
To teach spectroscopy, Whiting bought multiple spectro-
scopes of different brands and varying types.
28As the collec-
tion expanded over time, it included a Browningspectroscope, a spectroscope by the Soci /C19et/C19e Genevoise, a
Rowland concave grating spectroscope, an Evershed protu-berance spectroscope, and more.
29The fact that Whiting, not
a proﬂigate woman, purchased a variety of spectroscopes
rather than simply multiple copies of whatever was the
cheapest and best, implies that she wished her students tolearn more than just the basic use of such instruments.Having students try instruments from different manufac-turers taught them more about the properties of the instru-ments themselves, not just what they could be used for. Bycomparing different makes, students could see the relativestrengths and weaknesses of each instrument so they werebetter prepared to be consumers of such instrumentsthemselves.
For Whiting and others in the late 19th century, spectros-
copy was the crowning and cutting-edge science of both
astronomy and physics.
30Multiple spectrum maps hung in
the main physics lecture hall at MIT in the 1890s, in muchthe same way that charts of the periodic table are still hungin chemistry laboratories, as symbols of the practical powerof science as well as its elegance (p. 373 of Ref. 29).
Whiting believed in the power of spectroscopy to demon-strate the beauty and reach of science. Before being recruitedby Durant, she had attended lectures in New York City and
Brooklyn, some of which were devoted to the growing ﬁeld
of spectrum analysis.
31She later recalled, “These lectures
were illustrated by such brilliant experiments as I have notseen since, and served to bring this fascinating subject beforethe public, but no one really foresaw that here was the key to
unlock so many secrets of creation” (pp. 2–3 of Ref. 7). Lab
notebooks from Wellesley students indicate the importanceof spectroscopy in the curriculum. In the 1880s and 1890s, itwas the last part—the culmination—of the ﬁrst semesterphysics laboratories, although it did happen that in somesemesters, Whiting unfortunately ran out of time beforereaching spectroscopy.
29
C. Whiting’s philosophy of education
Ostensibly, the justiﬁcation for a laboratory course in
astronomy was to bring the ﬁeld of astronomy education upto speed with chemistry and physics by shifting the coretechnique of education from lectures to the laboratorymethod. (As an added beneﬁt, Whiting argued that it mightremove astronomy’s reputation as a course for dilettantes.)The course was also a sensible expansion of what could betaught: Until the Whitin Observatory was built at Wellesleyin 1900, astronomy classes were limited to observations witha four-inch Browning telescope, which was placed on theroof or one of the side porches of College Hall, as shown inFig.3.
32
However, laboratory work was not intended to forever
replace observation. On the contrary, Whiting argued thattraining students with exercises beforehand would betterenable them to take advantage of limited telescope time.
33
Laboratory exercises which could be conducted in the day-time, independent of weather, expanded the reach of whatwas possible to accomplish in an astronomy course andincreased the professor’s control over instruction.
34To popu-
larize the course, she published articles in Popular
Astronomy and School Science and Mathematics , and, in
1912, a book, Daytime and Evening Exercises in Astronomy ,
outlining the tools and exercises of the course.35These, she
hoped, would beneﬁt other colleges and even secondary
schools.
As Whiting explained in the preface to her textbook, she
had managed classes, which numbered between 60 and 100
students per year over the course of multiple years. As inother laboratory classes, she divided the class into moremanageable groups of 15 or so who would then conduct 2 hof work each week for a semester.
33The hands-on laboratory
instruction led to longer-lasting knowledge and built upskills that were simultaneously intellectual and physical.Annie Jump Cannon, a graduate of Whiting’s astronomy pro-gram, emphasized in her review of Whiting’s textbook boththe “years of practical work” and the “skillful teacher” whohad written the book.
36
Whiting wrote Daytime and Evening Exercises with ﬁrst-
year students in mind, although the prerequisite of a year ofphysics made it unlikely that many ﬁrst-year students tookher course. In the book, Whiting assumed no prior knowl-edge of spectroscopy or work with photographic plates. Thiswas to be developed in the course of the book. There were45 exercises in total. The student ﬁrst learned “Co €ordinates
of Stars from Globe and Star Catalogue” in exercise 1 andthen progressed to exercises using known data to study themovements of the planets (as in “Study of the ApparentMovements of Mars by Means of a Graph”) or the changingseasons (“Study of Seasons by Gardener’s SeasonApparatus”). Only in exercise 11 did the student conduct herﬁrst (naked eye) observations in “Observations on the Moonin the Sky,” after which the student worked with photographs
420 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Joanna Behrman 420 04 October 2023 22:52:39
(such as exercise 17 “Study of Photographs of the Pleiades
Cluster”). In exercises 23 and 24, the student studied the tele-scope and the spectroscope, respectively. The next threeexercises addressed the study and use of clocks (as in “Useof Clock to ﬁnd Angular Aperture” or “Use of SiderealClock to set the Telescope on any Object”). The ﬁnal third ofthe book included both more and less advanced topics: Thestudent would ﬁnally learn the constellations, but she wouldalso gain experience using photographic plates, developingskills Whiting knew to be used at observatories. Theseincluded the classiﬁcation of stars according to the HarvardClassiﬁcation System, “Determining Stellar Magnitude byGrades,” “Light Curve of Variables in the Cluster OmegaCentauri,” and “Heliocentric Latitude and Longitude of SunSpots.” Note that while the order of chapters might not nec-essarily have reﬂected the order in which another instructorconducted the exercises, it likely did reﬂect the order inwhich Whiting (the author) conducted them.
D. Illustration as a pedagogical tool
Whiting followed a pedagogy encapsulated in her saying,
“To sharpen the pencil sharpens the eyes.” The phrase
appears in many of Whiting’s writings including in the fol-
lowing: p. 4 of Ref. 32, p. vi of Ref. 33, p. 418 of Ref. 34,
and p. 434 of Ref. 35. Whiting attributed the phrase to the
teaching of botany, zoology, and history of art, and it mayindeed originate from there.
35At that time, sketching was a
skill for study and scientiﬁc work in each of these ﬁelds;moreover, scientiﬁc illustration was a very feminized ﬁeld.37
Whiting may also have been inﬂuenced in this directionfrom her own collegiate education at Ingham, which hadstrong specialties in both natural history and art.
38As histo-
rian Klaus Hentschel notes, “The parallel she [Whiting]drew between astronomy and natural history is notaccidental: The educational methods used in these classiﬁca-
tory disciplines are in fact very similar. Each rely [sic] exten-sively on atlases and plates as well as on observationaldrawing skills” (p. 393 of Ref. 29). It was also common to
make a comparison between botany and spectroscopy at the
turn of the 20th century, as they were both feminized or atleast feminizable labor (p. 356 of Ref. 29).
By the “pencil” phrase Whiting meant, most basically,
that “to draw the object ﬁxes the attention upon details ofstructure” (p. vi of Ref. 33). The literal sharpening of the
pencil before beginning the lesson drew the student’s mind
to the task at hand, and perhaps instilled in her a respect forthe tools of their trade. Attention to the details of the workingprocess likely drew attention to the details of the work itself.
Drawing was a large component of her instruction in
astronomy, evident in students’ notebooks and in her exhor-
tation to “use drawings in illustration wherever possible” (p.
391 in Ref. 29). Fortunately, all students had been required
to take a drawing class in their freshman year, whichincluded perspective and mathematical drawing.
7In
Whiting’s classes, students were asked to sketch ray dia-
grams, spectrum lines, and laboratory equipment, in additionto their observations when observing through a microscopeor telescope. For spectroscopic work, Whiting recommendedto other instructors that:
The students [sic] notebook work consists in
careful descriptions of the apparatus employed
accompanied by drawings, in detailed record of
observations, and spectrum maps finished withcolored crayons after the order of the elementarymaps on the Kirchhoff charts. These are plotted toa convenient scale from tables furnished upon
cards. To show whether the application of all this
to the subject in hand is apprehended, notebook
Fig. 3. Annie Jump Cannon, as an undergraduate student, looks through a telescope on one of the porches outside College Hall, circa 1880–1884. Image co ur-
tesy Wellesley College Archives, Library & Technology Services.
421 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Joanna Behrman 421 04 October 2023 22:52:39
answers to a list of questions on the interpretation
of photographed spectra of the envelopes of theSun and stars are advised (p. 390 in Ref. 21).
Her students sharpened pencils metaphorically and literally
as part of their astronomy education.
Whiting layered multiple meanings into the metaphor of
the sharpened pencil. She ﬁrst argued that to focus on
d e t a i l se n a b l e st h ev i e w e rt op e r c e i v em o r ew i d e l ya n d
deeply. She added that to focus on details or even largerobjects of study brings the viewer’s consciousness to bear
on the scene; that is, it activates the mental faculties. For
example, studying astronomical photographs “is also of use
in preparing the novice for intelligent observation, that his
mind as well as his vision may be behind the eyepiece”(p. 430 in Ref. 35). The student needed to learn not to be
a copyist so unthinking as to fall prey to preconceived
notions or to be unable to judge what was or was not impor-tant in their viewing ﬁeld. Whiting wrote, “There may be
said to be two objects in teaching astr onomy, to make
astronomers and to train the intelligence” (p. 499 of Ref.
34). Discernment was an ability valuable to all students, but
for upper-level classes, Whiting kept in mind the profes-sional goals of her graduates.
E. Comparison to other institutions
Whiting deliberately imitated the research and working
practices of professional astronomers. Ideally, students
learned the same processes using the same equipment asprofessional astronomers, up to and including work with the
spectroscope (p. vi, 44–48 of Ref. 33). The astronomy pro-
gram at Wellesley was also deliberately designed to showstudents the strong link between physics and astronomy
research and methodologies. In this, Whiting may have been
unusual among college professors, perhaps in part because
she acted as both professor of physics and professor of
astronomy. At many contemporary American colleges, withthe exception of Harvard, instruction in spectroscopy took
place in physics departments, while astronomy departments
taught observational astronomy and practical usage ofinstruments like sextants, zenith telescopes, and transit
instruments.
In 1911, Whiting joined the Committee on Cooperation in
Improvement of Teaching Elementary Astronomy, newlycreated by the American Astronomical Society, then the
Astronomical and Astrophysical Society of America
(AASA) (pp. 398–399 in Ref. 29). This committee, chaired
by Charles Leander Doolittle, conducted a survey of intro-
ductory astronomy classes at U.S. colleges and universities.Of 80 responses, 20 were categorized as from state universi-
ties, 30 from “ﬁrst rank” colleges and universities, and 32
from “smaller colleges and schools.”
39The committee found
that only 10 of the institutions surveyed offered an introduc-
tory astronomy course lasting for a whole academic year.
Another 13 institutions offered a semester-long course, and a
remaining 42 had shorter lecture courses. The type of
instruction offered varied widely, but the report (prepared byWhiting herself) bore out that her approach was rare. Table I
lists the results of the survey and uses some of Whiting’s lan-
guage from the report she presented to the 1912 AASA meet-ing. The only institutions that incorporated regular
observations and regular daytime laboratory work were
Harvard and Wellesley.
39IV. CONCLUSION: WHITING’S LEGACY
Over time Whiting’s course expanded to include spectro-
scopic studies of the sun and the use of photographic plates
obtained from, among other sources, Edward Pickering, who
then led the Harvard Observatory. Other materials were
obtained from the Goodsell Observatory, the Yerkes
Observatory, the Paris Observatory, the GeorgetownObservatory, etc.33,35Whiting very deliberately cultivated a
professional link between her educational program and occu-
pational work at the Harvard Observatory. Not only were
students trained on the Harvard Observatory materials but
they also learned to do the types of categorization tasks thatother workers at the observatory did, e.g., spectral classiﬁca-
tion using both Angelo Secchi’s and Harvard’s systems
(p. 394 in Ref. 29). The class also made a yearly visit to the
Harvard Observatory, where Pickering demonstrated the
work of the institution and students could see the directapplication of their own learning.
40
Although most of the students in any introductory astron-
omy class are not likely to become astronomers, Whiting
could count among her graduates professional astronomers
including Annie Jump Cannon and Ida E. Woods. For her
other students, Whiting could only hope that she had giventhem a greater appreciation for astronomy as both a subject
and a process, which is all any professor can ever hope for.
In 1887, many years before the Whitin Observatory was
built, Whiting wrote the following to a donor:
Our students after they have taken their degree,
many of them teach & are filling fine positions,
many of them are the intelligent centers of homes
& social circles, a few have taken a medical
degree, quite a number have taken up the librarians[sic] profession – telegraphy & stenography should
be left for women who have not had the
opportunity of a college training, but I should like
to send out some electricians & scientific
meteorologists, & when we have an observatory aswe have not yet, astronomers. It is probably [sic]
that one of our graduates will be soon put in
charge of a fine new astronomical observatory.
41
Some of her students, like Mary Wood Daley (Wellesley
A.B. 1908, M.A. 1911), Ernestine Wells Fuller (B.A. 1908,
M.A. 1911), and Leah B. Allen (M.A. 1912) followed in
Whiting’s footsteps as astronomy educators. Another
graduate, Anna Estelle Glancy (A.B. 1908), went on to earn
a Ph.D. in astronomy at the University of California,Berkeley before working at the Lick Observatory, the
Argentine National Observatory, and the American OpticalTable I. Results of Whiting’s survey.
Number of
responsesType of instruction in introductory astronomy
classes
30 Regular evening observations
12 Some daytime exercises10 “Some review of the elements of spectrum anal-
ysis as a basis for study of stellar classiﬁcation”
14 “Some library work”
2 Two hours weekly of daytime laboratory work
in addition to evening observations
Remainder Only lectures
422 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Joanna Behrman 422 04 October 2023 22:52:39
Company.42Whiting’s efforts to tailor her education to pro-
fessional practices at the Harvard Observatory came full cir-cle with Annie Jump Cannon (A.B. 1884, M.A. 1907) andIda E. Woods (A.B. 1893), who had distinguished careersdeveloping stellar classiﬁcation and discovering variablestars, respectively.
43
Sarah Frances Whiting retired from the physics depart-
ment in 1912, although she stayed on as a professor of theastronomy department and director of the WhitinObservatory until 1916.
44Although some of her reforms in
astronomy were eventually undone, she left a strong prece-dent for the importance of laboratory study and direct studentinteraction with scientiﬁc equipment in both astronomy andphysics. As a professor of astronomy (as well as physics),Whiting trained her students in the technologies and techni-ques used by astronomers, deliberately modeling the instruc-
tion after what she learned from her contact with Pickering
at the Harvard Observatory. From the beginning of her timeas a professor, Whiting dreamed of giving her students theskills and opportunities to prepare them for occupations asprofessional scientists, and she was undoubtedly proud to seeso much of her dream come to fruition.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author gratefully acknowledges the assistance of the
staff of the Wellesley College Archives and the Niels BohrLibrary & Archives.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)Electronic mail: jbehrman@aip.org, ORCID: 0000-0003-4820-8858.
1F. A. Stahl, “Sarah Frances Whiting: A foremother of American women
physicists,” Am. J. Phys. 73(11), 1009–1013 (2005).
2S. F. Whiting, “Department of Physics,” Wellesley College News 10(18),
6–7 (1911), <https://repository.wellesley.edu/object/wellesley10189 >.
3The term academies, which can often be used interchangeably with semi-
naries in the early 19th century, refers to private institutions which were
somewhat analogous to secondary schools. However, they often took stu-
dents between the ages of 12 and 20 and occasionally might be a student’s
ﬁrst institutional education or function for them as an institution of higher
education. M. Nash, Women’s Education in the United States, 1780–1840
(Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2005).
4C. S. Walker, “Wellesley College,” Amherst Record (2 July 1879),
included in the Sarah Frances Whiting Faculty Bio File, Wellesley College
Archives, Wellesley, Massachusetts.
5Ingham University began as the Attica Female Seminary in 1835, thenthe institution moved to Le Roy in 1837, and became the Le Roy Female
Seminary. In 1852, the New York Legislature granted the institution a
collegiate charter, making it the Ingham Collegiate Institute. The legisla-
ture changed the name in 1857 one ﬁnal time to Ingham University—itsﬁnal incarnation as the school closed in 1892 due to ﬁnancial problems.
Sarah Frances Whiting graduated from Ingham in 1865. R. L. Wing,
“Requiem for a pioneer of women’s higher education: The Ingham
University of Le Roy, New York, 1857–1892,” Hist. Higher Educ. Annu.
11, 61–79 (1991).
6For more on the history of Wellesley College, and especially its professori-
ate, see P. A. Palmieri, in Adamless Eden: The Community of Women
Faculty at Wellesley (Yale U. P., London, 1995).
7S. F. Whiting, “The experiences of a woman physicist,” Wellesley College
News 21(13), 1–6 (1913), <https://repository.wellesley.edu/object/welles-
ley10252 >.
8K. Tolley, The Science Education of American Girls: A Historical
Perspective (Routledge, England, 2003), pp. 35–53; J. Behrman,
“Physics… is for Girls?,” Phys. Today 75(8), 30–36 (2022).9H. S. Van Klooster, “Liebig and his American pupils,” J. Chem. Educ.
33(10), 493–497 (1956). p. 494.
10Letter from Eben Norton Horsford to his mother, dated 4 January 1846.
Quoted in S. Rezneck, “The European education of an American chemistand its inﬂuence in 19th-century America: Eben Norton Horsford,”Technol. Culture 11(3), 366–388 (1970), p. 375.
11E. N. Horsford, Scheme Matured and Adopted by the Trustees in 1886, on
the Basis of a Bequest Made to Wellesley College in 1878 (John Wilson
and Son, New York, 1886), p. 7.
12S. F. Whiting, “History of the physics department of Wellesley Collegefrom 1878 to 1912,” Department of Physics Records, Box 2, Folder“History,” Wellesley College Archives, pp. 1–2.
13For more on the history of physics education in the United States, see: D.E. Meltzer and V. K. Otero, “A brief history of physics education in theUnited States,” Am. J. Phys. 83(5), 447–458 (2015).
14M. R. Smith, “‘God speed the institute’: The foundational years,
1861–1894,” in Becoming MIT: Moments of Decision , edited by David
Kaiser (MIT Press, Cambridge, 2012), pp. 23–26.
15E. C. Pickering, Elements of Physical Manipulation (Hurd and Houghton,
New York, 1873).
16Wellesley College, Wellesley College Calendar 1876–7 (Wellesley
College, Massachusetts, 1876). <https://repository.wellesley.edu/object/
wellesley566 >.
17Wellesley College, Wellesley College Calendar 1879–80 (Wellesley
College, Massachusetts, 1879), p. 73. <https://repository.wellesley.edu/
object/wellesley569 >.
18Wellesley College, Wellesley College Calendar 1886 (Wellesley College,
Massachusetts, 1886), p. 41. <https://repository.wellesley.edu/object/
wellesley576 >.
19Wellesley College, Wellesley College Calendar 1899–1900 (Wellesley
College, Massachusetts, 1899), p. 62. <https://repository.wellesley.edu/
object/wellesley590 >.
20Like other elite northeastern white women’s colleges in the second half of
the nineteenth century, Wellesley College offered multiple track options totheir students—a General (or Literary) track, a Classical course, and aScientiﬁc course. At Wellesley, all tracks required students to take intro-ductory physics, but this was not necessarily common even among its peergroup. For instance, Vassar College, Bryn Mawr College, and RadcliffeCollege never required physics. In 1893, Wellesley eliminated the separatetracks and, similar to other colleges, moved to an elective system, whichplaced all students on the same track and culminated in the B.A. degree.Although classes in a science were still required, it was no longer requiredof all students to take physics speciﬁcally. J. F. Behrman, “The other phys-icists: Female physicists at U.S. women’s colleges, 1870–1940,” Ph.D. dis-sertation, Johns Hopkins University, 2020, pp. 49–56.
21S. Whiting, “Spectroscopic work for classes in astronomy,” PopularAstron. 13, 387–391 (1905).
22Wellesley College, Wellesley College Calendar 1904–1905 (Press of
Frank Wood, New York, 1904), pp. 91–94. <https://repository.wellesley.
edu/object/wellesley455 >.
23Sarah Frances Whiting to Professor [Philip] Fox, c. 1916, Sarah Frances
Whiting Papers, Box 1, Folder, “Correspondence: (Whiting-Wilkinson),”Wellesley College Archives, Wellesley, Massachusetts.
24Wellesley College, Wellesley College Bulletin 1916–1917 (Wellesley
College, Massachusetts, 1917), p. 61. <https://repository.wellesley.edu/
object/wellesley468 >.
25Barker worked in multiple ﬁelds, including physics, astronomy, and chem-
istry. He wrote a popular chemistry textbook and was also well known forfollowing and spreading the knowledge of cutting edge developments likethe 1878 solar eclipse, Thomas Edison’s electric lighting, and the discov-ery of radium. He helped Whiting expand her scientiﬁc network in multi-ple directions, including introducing her to Edison, which led to theintroduction of electric light at Wellesley. E. F. Smith, “George FredericBarker,” Biographical Memoir, Reprinted from the American Journal of
Science (September 1910) (National Academy of Sciences, Washington,
D.C., 1993); Ref. 7, pp. 2–3.
26R. L. Kremer, “Looking at scientiﬁc instruments on display at the UnitedStates centennial exhibition of 1876,” in Scientiﬁc Instruments on Display ,
edited by Silke Ackermann, Richard Kremer, and Mara Miniati, (Brill,Leiden, 2014), 109–131.
27The equipment included “K €onig tuning forks and organ pipes, a
Meyerstein spectrometer, a set of crystals for the study of polarized lightfrom Hofmann of Paris, a Browning spectroscope… [and] a Thomson
423 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Joanna Behrman 423 04 October 2023 22:52:39
mirror galvanometer made by Elliot of London.” L. McDowell, “Physics
at Wellesley,” Am. J. Phys. 4(2), 57–61 (1936), p. 59.
28H. Barnard, “Wellesley college: Notes of repeated visits,” Am. J. Educ. 5,
161–192 (1880), p. 176.
29See K. Hentschel’s work for greater detail on the acquisition and usage of
Wellesley’s spectroscopy equipment. K. Hentschel, Mapping the
Spectrum: Techniques of Visual Representation in Research and Teaching
(Oxford U. P., Oxford, 2002), p. 386.
30For more on the importance of spectroscopy and the history of its develop-
ment in the United States, see: G. K. Sweetnam, The Command of Light:
Rowland’s School of Physics and the Spectrum (American Philosophical
Society, Pennsylvania, 2000).
31Whiting always tried to keep abreast of new developments in the physicalsciences. For example, she and her students were among the ﬁrst in the
United States to experiment with x-rays in February 1896. Wilhelm
Conrad R €ontgen had ﬁrst discovered x-rays in November 1895, and news
of the discovery reached the United States in January 1896. J. S. Cameronand J. M. Musacchio, “Sarah Frances Whiting and the ‘photography of theinvisible’,” Phys. Today 73(8), 26–32 (2020).
32S. F. Whiting, “Department of astronomy,” The Wellesley News 10(23), 4
(1911), <https://repository.wellesley.edu/object/wellesley10194 >.
33S. F. Whiting, Daytime and Evening Exercises in Astronomy (Ginn,
Oxford, 1912), p. vii.
34S. F. Whiting, “Daytime work in astronomy,” School Sci. Mathematics 11,
417–421 and 494–499 (1911).
35For example: S. F. Whiting, “The use of photographs in teaching astrono-my,” Popular Astron. 13, 430–434 (1905).36A. J. Cannon, “Exercises in Astronomy,” Popular Astron. 21, 456 (1913).
37Notable female naturalists and scientiﬁc illustrators include Maria Sibylla
Merian, Mary Agnes Meara Chase, and Jane Colden. M. B. Ogilvie,
Women in Science: Antiquity through the Nineteenth Century, ABiographical Dictionary with Annotated Bibliography (MIT Press,
Cambridge, 1986), pp. 132, 55–56, and 60-1.
38A. Fiss, “Studying objects, objectifying students,” New York Hist. 98(2),
205–229 (2017).
39P. Fox, “Astronomical and astrophysical society of America,” Science
37(940), 25–40 (1913), p. 39.
40S. F. Whiting, “A tribute to Professor Pickering,” The Wellesley News 27(18),
4 (1919), <https://repository.wellesley.edu/object/wellesley10457 >.
41Letter from Sarah F. Whiting to Robert Hewitt dated 25 April 1887,
Folder “Correspondence: (Whiting-Wilkinson),” Box 1, Sarah Frances
Whiting Papers, Wellesley College Archives.
42For some basic information on the Wellesley College alumnae and staff beforeWorld War II, see: Wellesley College, “1942 record number of the Wellesley
college bulletin,” Wellesley Histories 6(1942), <https://repository.welle-
sley.edu/object/wellesley778 >Wellesley College, “Wellesley college record
1875–1912: A general catalogue of ofﬁcers and students,” Wellesley Histories
7(1912), <https://repository.wellesley.edu/object/wellesley777 >.
43For more on Cannon and other women’s work at the Harvard Observatory
and their context, see: D. Sobel, The Glass Universe: How the Ladies of
the Harvard Observatory Took the Measure of the Stars (Viking, New
York, 2016); A. Reser and L. McNeill, Forces of Nature: The Women who
Changed Science (Frances Lincoln, London, 2021), pp. 125–135.
44A. J. Cannon, “Sarah Frances Whiting,” Popular Astron. 35(10), 539–545
(1927), pp. 543–544.
424 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 6, June 2023 Joanna Behrman 424 04 October 2023 22:52:39
