
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkFEBRUARY 01 2023
Science on a stick: An experimental and demonstration
platform for learning several physical principles 
Dhananjay V . Gadre ; Harsh Sharma ; Sangeeta D. Gadre ; Smriti Srivastava
Am. J. Phys.  91, 1 16–121 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0080881
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A Pictorial Approach to Lenz’ s Law
Phys. T each.  (April 2018)
Lenz’ s law in the kitchen
The Physics T eacher  (May 1999)
A multidimensional framework of conceptual change for developing chemical equilibrium learning
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 2018) 04 October 2023 22:49:27
Science on a stick: An experimental and demonstration platform
for learning several physical principles
Dhananjay V. Gadrea)and Harsh Sharmaa)
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Netaji Subhas University of Technology,
New Delhi 110078, India
Sangeeta D. Gadreb)
Department of Physics, Kirori Mal College, University of Delhi, New Delhi 110078, India
Smriti Srivastavac)
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, Netaji Subhas University
of Technology, New Delhi 110078, India
(Received 4 December 2021; accepted 10 December 2022)
We share the design for a simple apparatus that, when paired with an Arduino processor and a
computer, can be used in a wide range of laboratory measurements: observing linear kinematics,
conﬁrming Faraday’s and Lenz’s laws, measuring magnetic moments, and observing the effects of
eddy currents. The setup is simple, inexpensive, easy to replicate, and can even be fabricated andused by students working at home.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of
Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0080881
I. INTRODUCTION
Internet e-commerce companies, such as Amazon,
Sparkfun, and Sunrom, have enabled easy access to embed-
ded computers, electronic components, sensors, and fabrica-
tion tools. This, in turn, has enabled the teaching communityto create science demonstration and pedagogy activities forthe classroom that could help kindle and retain student inter-
est in STEM subjects.
We propose a DIY experimental apparatus that focuses on
the linear motion of a magnet falling through a coil posi-tioned on a vertical acrylic tube. It consists of easily avail-
able electronic and other components, common household
items such as a plastic clothespin, and an Arduino platformconnected to a desktop/laptop computer running a custom
PYTHON code. This method enables veriﬁcation of kinematics
equations, estimation of acceleration due to gravity alongwith veriﬁcation of Faraday’s law and Lenz’s law, and esti-
mation of the magnet’s dipole moment using this single
experimental setup.
II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
A. Science on a stick apparatus
The block diagram in Fig. 1describes the simple appara-
tus that forms the science on a stick experimental and dem-onstration platform. It consists of a transparent acrylic tube,
which is 50 cm long, with an inner diameter of 15.4 mm and
an outer diameter of 20 mm. The tube is held vertically usinga wooden stand. A ﬂexible measuring tape, also called sew-
ing tape or tailor’s tape, is pasted along the length of the tube
for measuring the distance from the top of the tube.
A coil of wire is wound on a plastic bobbin made out of a
PVC pipe that ﬁts comfortably around the acrylic tube. Our
bobbin has an inner diameter of 22 mm and is 1.5 mm thick.
Using a 50 m enamelled copper wire to wind the coil resultedin 630 turns with an average radius Rof 12.6 mm and a
length aof 2.5 cm. A household plastic clothespin is used to
hold the bobbin at any required position on the acrylic tube.Two strong cylindrical neodymium magnets that are
12 mm diameter and 8 mm long are stacked together (to
increase the length of the magnet) and dropped through theacrylic tube. The magnets are initially held in place at thetop of the acrylic tube by another plastic clothespin. The
clothespin is opened to release the magnets into the tube,
which increases the reproducibility of the drop conditionscompared to hold and release the magnet by hand. Two reed
switches are employed: one at the top of the tube and another
one at the bottom after the coil. They consist of a pair of tinyferromagnetic contacts in a hermetically sealed glass enclo-sure. The contacts are normally open, and they close when a
magnetic ﬁeld is applied. These reed switches are connected
to the Arduino to detect the passing magnet to start and endthe data acquisition process for recording the voltageinduced across the coil. Figure 2shows a picture of this
experimental setup. It is recommended to use padding at the
bottom of the tube so that the magnets do not shatter whenthey exit the tube, and eye protection should be worn in casethey do shatter.
B. Signal processing circuits and programs
Figure 3shows the schematic diagram of the Arduino-
based signal processing circuit. The output of the coil is con-nected to a simple signal conditioning circuit based on theLM358 dual op-amp using a connector labeled “COIL” in
the schematic diagram. The output of the op-amp is fed to
the analog input (labeled A0) of the Arduino. Two digitalinput pins (D3 and D4) on the Arduino are used to read thestatus of the reed switches. The reed switches and associated
components are mounted on external PCBs (described
below) and connected to the Arduino circuit through twoconnectors labeled “TOP-SWITCH” and “BOTTOM-
SWITCH” in the schematic diagram. An LED labeled
“LED1” is for power-on indication while an LED labeled“LED2” and a push-button labeled “USER-SW” is for diag-nostics. Figure 4shows a photograph of the circuit. The
power supply for the system is þ5 V and is derived from the
USB interface to the Arduino.
116 Am. J. Phys. 91(2), February 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 116 04 October 2023 22:49:27
The system uses two reed switches. Each reed switch and
other associated components are soldered on a zero PCBrectangle and glued to a piece of the PVC pipe. Figure 5
shows the schematic diagram of the reed-switch-based cir-cuit, and Fig. 6shows several versions of the reed switch cir-
cuits. We found that reed switches do not exhibit uniformsensitivity to magnetic ﬁelds, requiring adjustments to thelengths of the tubes. As seen in the photograph, the tube wastrimmed such that when the magnets used for our experimentwere brought just inside the top of the tube, it turned on theattached reed switch. The state of the reed switch was dis-played on the LED labeled “SW-ON.”
A custom
PYTHON code (available on our GitHub reposi-
tory1) on the computer system triggers the Arduino to moni-
tor the top most reed switch. When a sufﬁcient magneticﬁeld is detected, it starts recording the coil voltage throughthe analog input pin, encodes the 10-bit values, and transferseach value to the computer system, where the
PYTHON code
plots the voltage as a function of time. The data acquisitionof the coil voltage stops when the bottom reed switch detects
the falling magnet.
The software for this setup consists of two parts: one pro-
gram runs on the Arduino and another suite of programs runson the desktop/laptop computer system. The Arduino pro-gram can be downloaded into the Arduino through the
Fig. 2. A picture of the experimental setup.
Fig. 3. Relevant part of the schematic diagram of the analog processing circuit together with an Arduino for the science on a stick setup.
Fig. 1. Block diagram for science on a stick setup.
117 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Gadre et al. 117 04 October 2023 22:49:27
Arduino Integrated Development Environment (IDE).2The
part of the program that runs on the laptop/desktop computer
is the PYTHON code that communicates with the Arduino pro-
gram (as explained below) to acquire and store the coil volt-age and time stamp data in CSV (comma separated values)format ﬁles. These ﬁles can then be processed with an addi-
tional
PYTHON program or with Microsoft Excel to extract the
velocity, peak voltage, and other information.
The Arduino program communicates with the computer
running the PYTHON code at 115 200 bits per second. The for-
mat of data is 8N1 (i.e., 8 data bits, no parity, and 1 stop bit).Each analog sample is encoded by the on-chip ADC of the
Arduino into a 10-bit number. This 10-bit number is trans-
ferred to the
PYTHON code using 2-bytes by the Arduino. The
time interval between samples achieved by this setup is0.42 ms. Figure 7(a) (the left column) shows the ﬂow chart
of the code that runs on the Arduino.
The
PYTHON code waits for the user to press the start button
and then sends a trigger command to the Arduino setup asshown in the ﬂowchart in Fig. 7(b) (the right column).In response, the Arduino setup starts sending encoded data
from the coil voltage once it receives a hardware triggerfrom the top reed switch. It continuously samples the ADCand transmits the data to the PC until the bottom reed switchis triggered. The Arduino then transmits an “end of data”symbol to the PC and waits for further trigger commandsfrom the PC. The
PYTHON code maintains two buffers for the
incoming data: one buffer stores the voltage data and the sec-ond buffer stores the corresponding time stamp at which asample was received. The process of receiving data and stor-ing it in the buffers is terminated when the
PYTHON code
receives the end of data symbol from the Arduino setup. The
PYTHON code then plots the received voltage data as a func-
tion of time and also stores the voltage and time-stamp datain the CSV format in an external ﬁle on the computer for fur-ther processing. The
PYTHON code is capable of acquiring a
single set or multiple sets of data and plotting them over asingle time scale as seen in Fig. 8.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Kinematics of linear motion
Kinematics of linear motion deals with the displacement s,
time t, initial velocity u, ﬁnal velocity v, and acceleration g
Fig. 4. Photograph of the analog processing circuit for the science on a stick
setup.
Fig. 5. Reed switch circuit.
Fig. 6. Photograph of three reed switch circuits. The tube lengths are
adjusted to compensate for the sensitivity of the switch, as described in the
text.
Fig. 7. Flowchart for the (a) Arduino data collection program and ﬂowchart
for the (b) Python program running on the computer.
118 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Gadre et al. 118 04 October 2023 22:49:27
experienced by an object in motion. To verify the equation
s¼utþð1=2Þgt2, the magnet is treated as the object that
experiences acceleration. The magnet is dropped with zero
initial velocity, and the top reed switch, placed at a distanceh
0from the top of the tube, is activated as the magnet passes
by it at speed u. A zero offset of the time is required for this
experiment (but not for other discussions in this paper) to
obtain a linear graph between sandt2:t0¼ð2h0=gÞ1=2is set
to be the time at which the magnet passes through the coil.In our experiment, h
0¼0:03 m.
When the magnet enters and leaves the coil, a voltage is
induced across the coil with two peak voltages with opposing
polarities, as shown in Fig. 8. The position of the center of
the coil (where the induced voltage is zero) is measured withthe help of the measuring tape on the tube to provide thevalue of s. The corresponding time tis measured at a point
of zero induced voltage. The coil is placed at different posi-
tions on the tube, and the linear relationship between sandt
2
is plotted in Fig. 9. The slope of the line is 4.89 60.21 m/s2,
and the resultant value of gis 9.7960.42 m/s2. The slope
and standard error are calculated using the curve_ﬁt functionfrom the scipy PYTHON library. This same data can be
plotted to estimate gfrom the relationships v¼uþgtand
v2/C0u2¼2gs.
B. Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction
Our setup demonstrates Faraday’s law of electromagnetic
induction and can be used to perform quantitative experi-
ments by varying the rate of change of magnetic ﬂux through
the coil.
Using the voltage curves in Fig. 8, we determine the size
of the ﬁrst voltage peak in each curve, which is given inTable I. As expected, these voltages increase as the coil is
moved down the tube, since the magnet is falling faster
when it reaches the coil. We also note that the amplitude of
the induced voltage when the magnet enters the coil issmaller than the amplitude of the induced voltage (of oppo-site polarity) when the magnet leaves the coil. This isbecause the magnet is accelerating downward, so that its exit
velocity is higher than its entrance velocity.
In Fig. 10, the squares of these peak voltages recorded in
Table Iare plotted vs the position of the coil. Faraday’s law
predicts the linearity of this relationship, since the rate ofchange of the magnetic ﬂux through the coil is proportional
Fig. 8. Plots showing voltage induced across the coil with time when the
coil is placed at different positions on the tube from 12 cm (extreme left) to
30 cm (extreme right) at intervals of 2 cm. The positions are measured fromthe top of the tube.
Fig. 9. Variation of swith t2. The slope of the linear graph is 4.89 60.21 m/s2.Table I. Distance of the coil from the top of the tube and corresponding
induced voltage across the coil.
Distance (cm) First peak voltage (V)
12 2.84
14 3.0116 3.1418 3.4520 3.5322 3.6824 3.9126 3.9928 4.1430 4.37
Fig. 10. A graph of square of the maximum induced voltage ðEmaxÞ2across
the coil vs position of the coil on the tube. The position of the coil is mea-
sured from the top of the tube. The magnet is also released from the top of
the tube.
119 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Gadre et al. 119 04 October 2023 22:49:27
to the speed of the magnet, and the square of the speed of the
magnet is proportional to the distance through which the
magnet falls.
C. Induced voltage through the coil due to motion
of a magnet
Even though the magnet is not very much smaller than the
coil, the dipole approximation of the magnetic ﬁeld yields a
reasonably good ﬁt. The variables are deﬁned in Fig. 11: the
moving magnet has magnetic moment m; the coil extends
from htohþaon the zaxis; ais the height of the coil; and
the average radius of the coil is R. Let the position of the
magnet be represented by fðtÞon the zaxis at time t.
To ﬁnd the ﬂux due to the dipole through a loop of the
coil, we use a very handy trick involving mutual inductances.The magnetic dipole mcan be modeled as a small current
loop of radius rand current I
rsuch that m¼pr2Ir. This
dipole loop is separated from the coil loop at position zby a
distance z/C0fðtÞ. Since the dipole loop radius r/C28R, the
ﬂux through the dipole loop due to a current IRin the coil
loop would be essentially due to the on-axis ﬁeld of the loop:U
r¼ðpr2l0IRR2=2Þ½ðz/C0fðtÞÞ2þR2/C138/C03=2. However since
the mutual inductances are equal, M¼Ur=IR¼UR=Ir,s o
we can ﬁnd
UR¼l0mR2
ðz/C0fðtÞÞ2þR2hi3=2: (1)
From Faraday’s law of induction, the induced voltage across
the coil is
E¼/C0dUR
dt¼/C0dUR
dfðtÞdfðtÞ
dt¼/C0 vdUR
dfðtÞ; (2)
where dfðtÞ=dtis the velocity vof the magnet. Hence, Eis
given by the equationE¼3
2l0mvR2 z/C0fðtÞ
ðz/C0fðtÞÞ2þR2hi 5
2: (3)
Making the approximation that all Ncoils are located at
the position z¼h,
E¼3
2l0mvR2 h/C0fðtÞ
ðh/C0fðtÞÞ2þR2hi 5
2: (4)
In order to obtain the expression for extreme induced volt-
ageEmaxacross the coil at z¼h, we differentiate Eq. (4)
with respect to fðtÞand equate it to zero. The possible solu-
tions are
fðtÞ¼h6R
2: (5)
From Eqs. (4)and(5), the expression for extreme voltage
Emaxinduced across the coil at z¼hdue to the moving mag-
net is
Emax¼724
25ﬃﬃ ﬃ
5pl0mvN
R2: (6)
The expression of extreme value of voltage induced across
the coil given in Eq. (6)indicates that Emaxand velocity of
the magnet have a linear relation for a given coil. This is ver-iﬁed by our experimental setup by plotting peak of induced
voltage E
maxwith the velocity of the magnet v, measured at
different positions of the tube as shown in Fig. 12. The plot
is a straight line. This plot also helps in indirect measurement
of the velocity of the magnet at a given position on the tube
by knowing the value of Emaxat that position.
D. Estimation of the dipole moment of the magnet
The slope of the line in Emaxvsvgraph in Fig. 12predicts
the dipole moment mof the falling magnet. Using Eq. (6)
and the slope of the best ﬁt line, 1.69 60.07 V s/m, results
Fig. 11. The apparatus showing positions of the coil and the magnet on the
tube from the origin at the top of the tube.
Fig. 12. A graph showing linear relation between the peak induced voltage(E
max) across the coil and the velocity ( v) of the magnet, when the coil is
placed at different positions on the tube. The slope of the line is 1.69 60.07
V s/m.
120 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Gadre et al. 120 04 October 2023 22:49:27
in the value m¼0:7960:03 Am2. (Slope and standard error
are calculated using curve_ﬁt function from the scipy PYTHON
library.)
The magnetic dipole moment was also found by using
an iPhone magnetic ﬁeld sensor to measure the ﬁeld alongthe axis of the dipole.3,4The magnetic ﬁeld of a dipole on
the axis is Bz¼l0m=2pz3. The slope of the graph Bzvs 1=z3
isð1:39/C210/C0760:02/C210/C07ÞTm3, yielding m¼0:79
60:01 Am2.
E. Demonstration of Lenz’s law
The setup described in this paper can also be used to dem-
onstrate Lenz’s law. In this demonstration, two LEDs of dif-ferent colors (red and green) are connected in parallel withthe coil with opposite orientations. When the falling magnetpasses through the coil, current is induced in the loop, andthe two LEDs, connected in parallel, glow one after the otherin a very short interval of time, as shown in Fig. 13, left
image. When the magnet orientation is reversed, the order inwhich two LEDs glow is also reversed, as shown in Fig. 13,
right image.
F. Effect of eddy currents on the motion of a magnet
The effect of an eddy current on the motion of a free fall-
ing magnet can be easily demonstrated with this experimen-tal setup using a few pieces of aluminium foil. We folded alength of the foil four times, pressed it neatly, and cut lengthsthat were wide enough to wrap around the acrylic tube. Thecoil was ﬁxed at the bottom of the tube. The magnet was
dropped into the tube, and the induced voltage was recorded
without the foil. Then, we wrapped the foil around the
acrylic tube above the coil. The magnet was again droppedinto the tube, and the coil voltage was recorded. The induced
voltage peaks were smaller and occurred later in the presence
of foil, demonstrating that the magnet was slowed down bythe foil.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A simple and inexpensive setup, which is easy to create
and deploy, has been designed for use in a laboratory. Thetotal cost of the setup, not including the desktop/laptop
computer or the Arduino, is around US$20. This work has
explored some of the phenomena that can be demonstratedusing this apparatus. In future experiments, we hope to fur-
ther explore the effect of eddy currents when the foil is
placed around the tube.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge useful discussions with our
colleague Professor Harish Parthasarathy. The authors
acknowledge our students Naman Puri and Mudit Aggarwalfor help with the experiments. The authors also acknowledge
the insightful comments and suggestions by the two
anonymous reviewers at American Journal of Physics .
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
a)Electronic addresses: dvgadre@gmail.com, ORCID: 0000-0002-7692-
0976 and harsh.sharma@wsu.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-0334-4269.
b)Electronic mail: sdgadre@gmail.com, ORCID: 0000-0003-0701-8839.
c)Electronic mail: smriti.nsit@gmail.com, ORCID: 0000-0001-5678-7058.
1Seehttps://github.com/cedt/SoS for Python and Arduino code ﬁles, sche-
matic and board layout ﬁles, etc.
2<https://docs.arduino.cc/software/ide-v1 >for downloading Arduino IDE.
3Unofre Pili, Renante Violanda, and Claude Ceniza, “Measurement of g
using a magnetic pendulum and a smartphone magnetometer,” Phys.
Teach. 56, 258–259 (2018).
4Martin Connors, “Measurement and analysis of the ﬁeld of disk magnets,”
Am. J. Phys. 40, 308–311 (2002).
Fig. 13. A magnet passing through the coil lights up one LED ﬁrst and then
the other LED in quick succession (left image). By reversing the pole of the
falling magnet, facing the coil, the sequence of lighting of the LEDs is
reversed (right image).
121 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Gadre et al. 121 04 October 2023 22:49:27
