
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkBOOK REVIEWS| JUNE 01 2023
Snow Crystals: A Case Study in Spontaneous Structure
Formation 
Snow Crystals: A Case Study in Spontaneous Structure Formation . . Kenneth  Libbrecht  440 pp.  Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ , 2022. Price: $1 19 (hardback). ISBN 9780691200378; ISBN 9780691223629. (Erik S. Thomson, Reviewer .)
Am. J. Phys.  91, 486 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0149392
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Shock response of snow
Journal of Applied Physics  (May 1993)
Unexpected Patterns in Snow and Dirt
Phys. T each.  (January 2018)
Acoustic Properties of Snow
J Acoust Soc Am  (June 2005) 04 October 2023 22:53:11
BOOK REVIEWS
Craig F. Bohren, Editor
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802; mailing address: P.O. Box 887, Boalsburg, PA 16827; bohren@meteo.psu.edu
Snow Crystals: A Case Study in Spontaneous Structure
Formation. Kenneth Libbrecht. 440 pp. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2022. Price: $119(hardback). ISBN 9780691200378; ISBN 9780691223629.
( E r i kS .T h o m s o n ,R e v i e w e r . )
There is a familiar feeling to those for whom winter is a
special season—the tingle one feels on seeing the ﬁrst ﬂakes
of snow drift from the sky or upon drawing open the curtainsto ﬁnd the ﬁrst snowy morning. Fresh snow brings brightness
and new activities following late fall’s muddy ground and
dreary light. Even when we are no longer young, many of usstill tilt our heads skyward and chase falling snow in an
attempt to catch the perfect ﬂake on our tongues. When we
tire, we may look down at our sleeves or the back of ourgloved hands and realize we already have that perfect ﬂake
amongst a cornucopia of crystals that fell from the sky and
landed perfectly preserved for a moment in time.
Kenneth Libbrecht is clearly one for whom snowﬂakes
remain hypnotic, and he has shared this fascination through
nine previous books featuring photographs of snowﬂakes. Ifyou’ve seen a photograph of a snowﬂake, chances are it was
taken by Libbrecht. The beauty of snowﬂakes inspires scien-
tiﬁc wonder, and his images serve to share this wonder witha wider audience.
Now Professor Libbrecht adds a somewhat more scientiﬁc
monograph to his visual snowﬂake morphology library:Snow Crystals: A Case Study in Spontaneous Structure
Formation. The book is the newest in a long series of trea-
tises, perhaps in modern scientiﬁc times originating withJohannes Kepler’s 1611 “Strena, seu de Nive Sexangula”
(On the snowﬂake, or the six-angled crystal), wherein emer-
gent patterns form the basis for fundamental exploration.Libbrecht’s contribution is printed in the format of a text-
book, and it appears to have the ambition to cover snow crys-
tals as comprehensively as possible. Given that monographslike Hobbs’s 1974 Ice Physics , Pruppacher and Klett’s
Microphysics of Clouds and Precipitation , and Petrenko’s
Physics of Ice are several decades old, there is certainly
room for an updated reference text.
Libbrecht begins the task with some general descriptions
of snowﬂake phenomenology, which provides context for ashort historical account of how many eminent scientists have
been inspired by the beauty and uniqueness of the crystals.
From Chinese philosophers to Descartes and Kepler, thesymmetry, clarity, and diversity of crystals have inspired
many thinkers. In fact, attempts to explain their symmetryled to the development of proto-atomistic theories, proposing
that the crystals consisted of fundamental building blocks.
The obstacle that Libbrecht faces is that the striking
appearance of snow crystals is only the tip of the proverbialiceberg one can explore in the context of ice. On the onehand, ice is unusual among polycrystalline solids in havingboth liquid and gas forms at temperatures easily accessiblein the lab, enabling studies, for example, of the effect of sur-face disorder on bulk melting. This range of accessible formsmakes deﬁning the bounds of icy problems quite a difﬁculttask. On the other hand, the uniqueness of ice, or rather H
2O,
is its essential role in our environment and lives. The phe-nomenon that Libbrecht clearly wants to explore is the emer-gence of visual structures from frozen water molecules.Fundamentally, this is a manifestation of non-equilibriumgrowth, where the equally stimulating questions related to,for example, how the initial seed forms (nucleation), or whatis the surface state (disordered, quasi-liquid, premelted), areof secondary importance when there already exists the driv-ing force for growth.
Libbrecht is most successful when he provides glimpses
of the plentiful underlying physics but quickly moves on tothe phenomenological. He appears to recognize this and bythe halfway mark the text refocuses on creating and catalog-ing all manner of snow crystals. From creating crystals in thelaboratory to observing and imaging fallen snow, the textbecomes a handbook for a modern-day Wilson Bentley.
I have spent a good deal of time reﬂecting on where this
book ﬁts into a physicist’s library—especially in the age ofdigitized media. At its heart it is not a textbook, or at leastnot one I could imagine utilizing in any course beyond a spe-cialized seminar. However, Libbrecht’s images are wonder-ful and best viewed on paper, and the book’s high qualitypaper stock and printing make them stand out. This is abook that is fun to return to for the pictures, the technicaldescriptions—and simply for the wonder. It is well-suited tothe scientiﬁcally curious, analog generation, and a worth-while addition to Libbrecht’s multitude of more purelyartistic contributions.
Erik S. Thomson is a Senior Lecturer in Experimental
Atmospheric Chemistry at the Department of Chemistry and
Molecular Biology, at the University of Gothenburg in
Gothenburg, Sweden. Erik’s research focuses on phase tran-
sition behavior in the atmosphere and other aspects of phys-
ics and chemistry at interfaces—with a keen eye towards icysurfaces.
486 Am. J. Phys. 91(6), June 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 486 04 October 2023 22:53:11
