
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkOCTOBER 01 2023
Special issue in celebration of the International Y ear of
Quantum Science and T echnology 
Am. J. Phys.  91, 763 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0173872
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
The celebrity physicist
Evolutionary dynamics of cooperation with the celebrity ef fect in complex networks
Chaos  (January 2021)
Max Planck: One hundredth birthday celebration
Physics T oday  (August 1958) 04 October 2023 22:57:40
Special issue in celebration of the International Year of Quantum
Science and Technology
(Received 25 August 2023; accepted 25 August 2023)
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0173872
In 2025, we’ll celebrate the one hundredth anniversary of the
development of quantum mechanics, and the United Nations isworking towards a declaration of 2025 as the InternationalYear of Quantum Science and Technology (IYQST). TheAmerican Journal of Physics will join the celebration with a
special issue to kick off the year in January 2025.
The IYQST not only marks 100 years since Erwin Schr €odinger
developed wave mechanics and Werner Heisenberg, MaxBorn, and Pascual Jordan developed matrix mechanics. It also
celebrates the contributions that quantum mechanics has made
to our lives in the past century and will continue to make inthe next one. The initiative’s website, Quantum2025.org,reminds us that quantum mechanics has contributed to ourunderstanding of “why the sun shines, how magnets work,why atoms stick together in chemical bonds, and how the pat-tern of galaxies in the universe formed.” Quantum mechanicswas central to the development of transistors, lasers, andLEDs, and in the coming years, physicists will be using quan-tum mechanics to contribute to the UN’s development goalsof improved health and wellbeing, reduced inequalities, indus-try and infrastructure innovations, economic growth, climateaction, and clean energy.
AJP’s special issue will celebrate all these aspects of
quantum mechanics. We welcome papers that explain appli-cations of quantum mechanics that can be presented in anundergraduate or graduate-level physics course. Papers onhistorical developments in quantum mechanics may beappropriate, if they will be interesting to instructors whodon’t specialize in the history of physics. Of course, we wel-come your ideas for how to effectively teach quantummechanics, quantum computing, and quantum information,and we would be willing to consider those ideas even forteaching at the secondary-school level, since the effort to
broaden the teaching of quantum mechanics will need to
include contributions by those with experience teaching it atthe university level. And as part of the kick-off to a year of
celebrations, the issue can include papers supporting out-
reach efforts to the general public.
Submissions will be due by March 31, 2024. More infor-
mation on AJP’s general policies and submissions proce-
dures can be found at our website, ajp.aapt.org.
Interested in being more involved? Consider serving as a
guest editor. Guest editors will oversee the review process
and then serve as the ﬁrst and most careful reader of eachpaper, providing authors of accepted papers with editing sug-
gestions to make them as readable and useful as possible.
Since this issue will cover a broad range of topics, we’ll
need editors with an equally broad range of expertise; there-
fore the tasks may be shared amongst several guest editors.
Please contact me to express interest or ask for more infor-
mation: meparks@colgate.edu. Note that a modest stipend isavailable and that guest editors may also submit papers to
the special issue.
To learn more about special issues, be sure to read our
most recent special issue (September 2023) on teaching the
physics of the environment, sustainability, and climate
change, either in print or on our website, https://pubs.aip.org/
aapt/ajp , and, while you’re there, also look at the parallel
special collection in The Physics Teacher :https://pubs.aip.
org/aapt/pte . I hope it will inspire your efforts in that area as
well as showcase the value of a special issue. I’m looking
forward to reading your submissions!
Beth Parks, Editor, AJP
763 Am. J. Phys. 91(10), October 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 763 04 October 2023 22:57:40
