
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkEDITORIAL| MAY 01 2022
Special issue on teaching about the environment,
sustainability , and climate change 
Beth Parks ; White Gary
Am. J. Phys.  90, 327 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0092653
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Call for papers on environment, sustainability , and climate change
The Physics T eacher  (May 2022)
Special issue in celebration of the International Y ear of Quantum Science and T echnology
Am. J. Phys.  (October 2023)
A framework for climate change issues based education
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2022) 04 October 2023 23:07:54
Special issue on teaching about the environment, sustainability,
and climate change
(Received 23 March 2022; accepted 23 March 2022)
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0092653
The editors of the American Journal of Physics and The
Physics Teacher are joining together to issue a call for papers
for special collections on the physics of the environment,sustainability, and climate change.
Our readers are well aware of the pressing global problems
in these areas and the contributions that physicists have madein the past (including the 2021 Nobel Prize). Many physicsteachers are looking for ways to better prepare our students tounderstand these problems as citizens and to address them asscientists. And we suspect that many of our readers havealready found ways to teach these topics but have not thoughtto describe their work as a paper and share it with others. Aspecial collection is our way of bringing together these indi-viduals, motivating authors to share resources that will be col-lected in a convenient form for other readers.
Linking special issues of AJP and TPT is, as far as we
know, a ﬁrst for the two journals, and it provides an excellentavenue for sharing ideas on all levels. To which journalshould you send your contribution?
TPT focuses on physics instruction at the introductory
level, both in secondary schools and in universities, and alsoon teaching physics concepts as part of general educationcourses; the benchmark length for a TPT article is 2000
words. AJP focuses on physics instruction beyond the intro-
ductory level, mostly at the undergraduate level but alsoincluding graduate level instruction when the topic is of highinterest or broad usefulness. Both journals publish somepapers on history and philosophy of physics and outreach to
the general public, and authors of these papers are encour-
aged to contact the editors to determine which journal ismore appropriate. More information on our editorial policiesis found on our web pages.
1,2
Submissions across the range of instructional materials
are encouraged: examples include demonstrations,laboratory experiments, short units, homework problems,
course outlines, and curricular sequences. In choosing
what to submit, focus on how your work can be useful toyour colleagues, rather than merely on how su ccessful was
your implementation. It’s challenging to describe an entire
semester-long course in a brief paper, so if you’ve devel-oped a really novel and successful course, consider writinga textbook! However, if there’s a nugget that you think
will be useful to readers, then please submit it. We also
welcome (and in some cases, require) supporting materialsuch as course handouts to be shared as supplementary
material.
We hope to publish these issues in late spring or early fall
2023, so to allow time for review, please aim to submit yourpapers by November 30, 2022.
Are you really excited about this topic? Consider serv-
ing as a guest editor for these special issues. Guest editors
will oversee the review process in conjunction with thejournal editor and work with authors of accepted papers to
edit their work to improve the presentation. Contact
Beth Parks at meparks@colgate.edu or Gary White atgwhite@aapt.org for more information. A modest stipendis available.
We are looking forward to sharing the creative and inno-
vative ways that our community has found to address these
difﬁcult issues.
Beth Parks, Editor, AJP
Gary White, Editor, TPT
1AJP editorial policy is found at https://www.aapt.org/Publications/AJP/
About/editorial_policy.cfm .
2TPT information for authors is found at https://www.aapt.org/publications/
tptauthors.cfm .
327 Am. J. Phys. 90(5), May 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 327 04 October 2023 23:07:54
