
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2023
Teaching physics in the woodsa) 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Frédéric Bouquet  
 ; Julien Bobrof f 
 ; Lou-Andreas Etienne  
 ; Clara V ardon  
Am. J. Phys.  91, 685–689 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0143470
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Laser cutting of wood and wood composites - Evaluation of cut quality and comparison to conventional
wood cutting techniques
PICALO
Van E. W ood
Laser incision of woods: Ef fects on liquid penetration
ICALEO 04 October 2023 22:56:04
Teaching physics in the woodsa)
Fr/C19ed/C19eric Bouquet,b)Julien Bobroff,c)Lou-Andreas Etienne,d)and Clara Vardone)
Universit /C19e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, Orsay 91405, France
(Received 24 January 2023; accepted 1 June 2023)
We developed a two-day physics class that uses a nearby forest as a teaching location. Using low-
cost material, students design and carry out physics projects outside of the usual controlledenvironment that is a classroom. In this way, they come to realize that physics can be used to
understand the real world. They organize and present their results in an original format, an exhibit
they collectively build. This project is an introduction to the role physics can play in exploring
environmental issues, incorporating a sensitive and positive aspect which is important in this time
of environmental crisis.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0143470
I. INTRODUCTION
Universities cannot ignore the environmental crisis and
need to adapt their curricula.1,2In France, it will be manda-
tory after 2027 to offer classes covering the notions of sus-
tainability and environmental crisis in every undergraduateprogram.3Physics, as a discipline, offers several relevant
approaches to address this issue.1,4,5At the undergraduate
level, one of the most obvious entry points is the concept ofenergy, as it is already taught at this level and can be used to
address various aspects of the environment such as renew-
able energy or the greenhouse effect.6
In May 2022, the international workshop “Reimagine
Physics Teaching” brought together university physics teach-
ers to reﬂect on original ways and the possible evolution of
teaching physics.7,8One of the outcomes of this workshop
was the idea for a new exercise, taking place largely in a for-
est and letting students look at the forest with the physicist’s
eye. The goal is to demonstrate the usefulness of physics totackle larger problems through an engaging and original
activity. Building upon this idea, we developed a new exer-
cise: In two days, students design and carry out physicsexperiments from scratch in the forest, analyze their data,
and present their results in an exhibit they build together.
II. DESCRIPTION OF THE EXERCISE
The objective of this project-based exercise is to let stu-
dents explore how physics can describe the real world, out-
side of the laboratory and controlled experiments. We wantthe students to see how physics can be used to understand
nature, even though nature is more complicated than simpli-
ﬁed models. This is a ﬁrst step in understanding what rolephysics could play in addressing the environmental crisis.
We want students to observe the forest, identify a scientiﬁc
question based on some of these observations, design andcarry out an experiment to investigate this question, analyze
the data, communicate the results to peer students, and reﬂect
on their place in the environment.
Additional objectives are to develop students’ soft skills:
group work, sharing and transmission of knowledge, and cre-
ativity. Finally, we want students to take pleasure in doing
physics even though the environmental crisis is a dauntingsubject.
This exercise was given to 16 undergraduate students
from our university who were following a dual physics and
geology curriculum. The students were a mix of second year(12) and third year (4) students. It took place in early
September, on two consecutive days. A striking point of thisexercise is that it partly takes place outdoors, within a forest
a few minutes away from the classroom building. A large
picnic table next to a trail served as a meeting point for theoutdoor activities. An illustrated summary of these two days
is provided in the supplementary material.
9
A. Day one: “Understanding the forest”
The starting activity is an ice-breaker to let the partici-
pants know each other and to set the tone for this exercise.
The students are tasked to wander in the forest individuallyand in silence and to observe the forest. After 15 min, they
have to bring a keepsake of their wandering to the picnic
table and present it to the rest of the class. The teachers alsoparticipate in this activity. Then, still around the picnic table,
the teachers present the objectives and the organization of
the exercise to the students.
Next, the students, in pairs, have to look for ideas for
physics projects. To guide their thoughts, they pick three
random constraints among a list, for example: sounds/tiny/
very large/count/fast/slow/colors/heavy /light/tree/alive/liquid,
etc.
9They have to imagine projects in relation to each of them;
other ideas are also welcomed. This phase of exploration is
held in the forest (Fig. 1), but after sufﬁcient time, everyone
gathers in a classroom to make a catalog of all the project
Fig. 1. The students are looking for project ideas in the forest.
685 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 685 04 October 2023 22:56:04
ideas. The teachers help to synthesize ideas and to check the
feasibility of projects.
Once the catalog is done, each pair of students chooses a
project, not necessarily one of their own. They have then therest of the day to complete it: devise the experimental proto-col, perform the measurements in the forest (Fig. 2), and ana-
lyze their data. To do so, they only have a limited time
(about 5 h), and low-tech equipment such as their smart-
phone, ropes, rulers, and measuring tapes. Equipment isadded for some speciﬁc projects (for example, a portableBluetooth speaker for an acoustic study). The students carryout their measurements autonomously in the forest and canreturn to the building to analyze their data. To close the day,
each group presents their results to the rest of the class
informally.B. Day two: “Explaining the forest”
The goal of the second day is to present all the project
results in a shared original exhibit, for which the students areresponsible. They are strongly encouraged to look furtherthan a series of posters, and to think of different ways tointeract with a public such as mock ups, short activities,small discussions, or quizzes. They are also responsible forthe overall organization and design of the space, as well asthe different materials that need to be printed (labels, titles,posters, etc.). Their constraint is that the exhibit should becoherent and not simply a juxtaposition of different stands.
The start of the day gives the students tools to achieve all of
this. They are ﬁrst invited to explore an “inspiration room,” aroom that contains references on science, but also design,art, and do-it-yourself projects.
10They are also given an
introduction to fast prototyping, in order to give them aworking method for the very short time at their disposal.9
Rapid prototyping is a method that was ﬁrst used in softwaredevelopment, but which was later applied to differentﬁelds.
11,12The key idea of this method is to make prototypes
very early in the course of a project, even if these prototypesare imperfect and roughly made. The goal is not to have aperfect model that represents the end product but to obtain aworking object with which we can interact and test ourideas.
8Here, we gave the students 30 min to build different
mock-ups of their ideas for the exhibit using frugal materialssuch as toothpicks, playmobile sets, stationery, play dough,wooden skewers, and cardboard. Students then had 3 h todesign and build the exhibit, identifying the different tasksthat need to be done and dividing them among different taskforces. The opening of the exhibit, midafternoon, ﬁxes astrong deadline. Anyone in the building is invited to visit theexhibit and discover the students’ work (Fig. 3).
Fig. 2. A group of students is studying the ﬂow of a river.
Fig. 3. The students present their results in a public exhibit they collectively build.
686 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Bouquet et al. 686 04 October 2023 22:56:04
Working on an exhibit is unusual for our students; we
chose this format to force the students to think outside of
the usual lab reports and work on their soft skills. It is a
way to highlight their work, and the interaction with the
public is rewarding for them, even though the exhibit is
short-lived.
The exercise ends with the exhibit opened to other stu-
dents in the university, followed by a debrieﬁng session,
allowing students and teachers to discuss these two days.
III. PHYSICS IN THE FOREST
Different kinds of projects can be carried out in a forest to
explore the role of physics:
•measuring a property (e.g., measure the mechanicalresponse of a spider’s web);
•estimating a quantity (e.g., estimate the number of trees);
•measuring a distribution (e.g., the distribution of the
height of trees);
•testing a law of physics (e.g., the fall of bodies);
•testing a scaling law (e.g., diameter of trees according totheir height);
•building an experiment (e.g., build a frugal microscope).
This diversity gives a wide range of possible projects.
Even though we want students to deﬁne their own proj-
ects, we checked the feasibility of this method of teaching
physics by playing the role of students beforehand: We
made a list of possible projects and tested out some of
them. For example, we measured the diameter of a spider
silk using a red laser pointer and observing the interfer-
ence pattern of the illuminated silk. We found an interfer-
ence pattern consistent with a thread of a 9 lmd i a m e t e r
with a 10% uncertainty. This is in the expected 5–10 lm
diameter range;13we also measured a dusty indoor cob-
web and found a larger value (22- lm diameter) presum-
ably due to the dust thickening the thread. Manipulating
spider silk is a bit delicate, but not that difﬁcult. A student
project could be to study whether the diameter of the silks
is constant everywhere on a given web, or whether some
threads are wider (and possibly stronger) than others.
Another project could be to compare outdoor and indoor
spiderwebs to investigate if the diameters of the threads
are different.
A second example is the measure of Young’s modulus of
tree branches. Young’s modulus is a parameter that will
limit the maximum height a tree can grow before buckling
appears.14We measured Young’s modulus of a branch
(70 cm long, with a 1-cm diameter) by using different tech-
niques: either by applying a force at the extremity and mea-
suring the deﬂection of the branch or by measuring its
natural oscillation frequency (see the supplementary
material9for the details of the equations and hypothesis).
When we attached a 0.45 kg water bottle at the extremity of
the branch, a 5-cm deﬂection was measured, corresponding
to a 2 GPa Young’s modulus, with a 20% uncertainty due to
the deﬂection measurement. The natural measurement fre-
quency can be measured by different methods; video analy-
sis, detection of the mechanical vibrations with a
smartphone accelerometer in contact with the base of the
branch, or with a smartphone magnetometer if a small mag-
net is attached to the branch. All three methods led to a nat-
ural frequency of 11 Hz with a precision of 5%. This is
consistent with a Young’s modulus of 7 to 8 GPa if a wooddensity of 500 kg/m3is assumed. Even though the same
branch was used for these measurements, the results are sig-
niﬁcantly different. The fact that the cantilever models do
not exactly describe the system can be caused by various
factors; for example, the branch was modeled as a perfect
1-cm diameter cylinder, which it was not. A student project
could be to check the scaling laws predicted by the models
when varying the load, or the length and diameter of the
branch.
We made a list of experiments to be made available to stu-
dents lacking ideas for projects, which is supplied in the sup-
plementary material of this article.9During the actual
exercise, we did not need this list, and the students came up
with their own ideas, among which they picked:
•the study of the fall of acorns (Does the free fall model apply
to acorns? Can the fall of many acorns kill a passerby?);
•the study of the ﬂow of a river (Compare different ways of
measuring or estimating the ﬂow of a river. Is the ﬂow
homogeneous across a river cross-section?);
•the optical magniﬁcation of a drop of water on a leaf
(How does the size of the drop, considered as a lens, affect
the magniﬁcation?);
•the relationship between the size of the trees and the slope
of the ground on which the trees grow (Is there a correla-
tion between these two parameters?);
•measuring the ﬂexibility of a tree or a branch (Measure an
averaged Young’s modulus modeling tree branches as
cantilevers.);
•sound attenuation in the forest (How does the tree surface
density affect the sound attenuation?);
•relation between the tree surface density and tree height
(Is there a correlation between these two parameters?).
Compared to students’ labs in controlled environments,
prepared and veriﬁed beforehand by experienced teachers,
these projects often do not provide clear results. This is
deliberate on our part. It helps students understand that a
classroom experiment is a carefully contrived situation.
Furthermore, they realize that even with the limited time and
material at their disposition, they can obtain relevant infor-
mation; the fact that more advanced experiments would be
needed to go further is then discussed.
Letting students develop their own project is an effective
way to engage them; they are conducting their own study, not
their teacher’s. One consequence of this freedom is that someof the projects chosen by the students may have only a remote
connection to the notions of environment, sustainability and
climate. It should be possible to guide the students a bit more
in that direction by letting the students think about how these
notions affect the forest and could be linked to their projects.
The project conducted by a pair of students during our exer-
cise, looking for a correlation between tree size and the slope
of the ground, is a good example of a project that moves away
from pure physics into environmental physics.
IV. STUDENTS’ FEEDBACK
A brief online survey was sent to collect students’ feed-
back, in addition to the oral debrieﬁng. It contained a few
questions, some quantitative, and some open ended. The
small number of students (16) does not allow for a solid sta-
tistical analysis, but a qualitative analysis can be performed.
As often during a novel teaching method,15the general
feedback from the students is positive. In answer to the
687 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Bouquet et al. 687 04 October 2023 22:56:04
survey question “What did you think of this exercise?” the
average of the student’s answers was 6.1 on a scale from 1
(“I did not enjoy it”) to 7 (“I loved it”), and the statements
collected during the debrieﬁng or open-ended questions are
positive. For example: “ another point of view on equations
and physics ”; “Feeling good ”; “Satisfaction at having been
able to perform a scientiﬁc project from A to Z ”; “we are
completely immersed in a social and scientiﬁc experiment
and it feels good !”; “I really loved it. ”
Regarding physics learning, to the question “Do you feel
you have learned more or less than during the same number
of hours of classical lab class?,” the average answer was 4.6
on a scale from 1 (“much less”) to 7 (“much more”). In other
words, the students believe they learned about as much dur-
ing this exercise as during a classic lab experience.
Several main themes can be found in the debrieﬁng and in
the students’ open-ended responses:
•teamwork (“ getting organized as a team ”; “This lesson
gave me knowledge about […] teamwork ”; “teamwork can
be very effective if you get organized ”; “teamwork is not
easy because we all have different ideas and we don’t
agree so easily ”);
•freedom and autonomy (“ The freedom we had ”; “choose
the theme we want to work on ourselves, and set up our
own experiences .”)
•the link between theory and reality (“ Science is everywhere,
you just have to make a little effort to notice it .” “Another
point of view on equations and physics ”; “A more concrete
aspect of research and how we can apply our knowledge ”;
“Science is not just long and incomprehensible calculations ”)
•the time constraint (“ The time constraints. […] it was an
adrenaline rush. It forced us to work fast (in a good
way) ”; “stress to ﬁnish […] the exhibit ”)
•the low-cost aspect of the tools (“ we can accomplish much
more than we think with little equipment ”“there is no
need for very sophisticated equipment to do science ”;
“with little we can do a satisfying job ”; “one can experi-
ment from very little ”)
•the pleasure of being in the forest (“ Being outside and
looking at nature through physics ”; “Telling the forest ”;
“More forest ”)
Having themes in the students’ feedback such as team-
work, autonomy, and the link between theory and reality is
not surprising since project-based learning is known to have
a strong effect on these subjects.16–18The low-cost aspect of
the material also came up quite often, in a positive way. Thestudents are not put off by this low-cost approach, compared
to the usual lab instruments they use in other lab classes.
This approach gives the students more freedom than they
would have with more precise, but more fragile and more
expensive instruments, and is justiﬁed by the fact that the
focus of this exercise is on the process (how to do physics in
real conditions) more than on the precision of the results.
This is an approach that we had already successfully tested
in another context.
18
In general, university instruction taking place in a forest
either focuses on the forest (such as management or exploita-
tion of the forest), or uses it for ﬁeld work in direct relation-
ship to the topic of the exercise (ﬁeld trip for classes of
biology, ecology, or biodiversity).
Our approach is different as we use the forest as a place to
teach general physics. It is actually not that different fromthe Forest Schools.19,20Forest School is a form of education
particularly developed in Scandinavia and the UK, mainly
for kindergartens and elementary schools. It’s an outdoor
education, mostly woodland, that focuses on learning by
doing and hands-on activities. Albeit for the obvious differ-
ence in age group, we share the idea of a separate learningspace which offers more freedom, being removed from the
physical constraints of the classroom.
Another theme appears in the open answers of the stu-
dents, with a negative aspect: The presence of mosquitoes
during the two days of teaching. Despite being somewhat
anecdotal, these answers underline an important point:
Unlike a classroom, where all the technical aspects can be
controlled, going outside introduces some unpredictability.The weather is an obvious example of an uncontrollable fac-
tor that can impact an outdoor exercise, and it is prudent to
plan ahead for different teaching scenarios depending on the
conditions.
V. ADAPTING THE FORMAT
Is this exercise transposable to other universities, given
adaptations to the local context? The salient points seem to
us to be the following:
•low-cost experiments outside the labs;
•let students ﬁgure out an interesting problem toinvestigate;
•the autonomy and freedom they have to take charge of
their project;
•the creative presentation of the results.
The forest is not that important as such. It serves as a natu-
ral setting that students explore, but Nature is not limited tothe forest, and this exercise could easily be adapted to other
places: a meadow, an urban park, or the streets of a city. For
example, we have also created a list of experiment ideas that
could be conducted in an urban setting or during a subway
ride (see the supplementary material).
The two consecutive-day format can also be adapted. We
appreciate this format for the dynamic it creates with the stu-
dents who are focused on their project without other aca-demic concerns. It is easy to consider different formats: a
short one-day version, or conversely a longer version, with
more elaborate projects. One could also conceive hybrid sol-
utions mixing more classical exercise on environmental
physics and sessions in the forest giving students the oppor-tunity to apply knowledge they would just have learned.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have designed an exercise that presents physics as a
useful tool to understand and investigate the real world.
While the question of the environmental crisis is clearly in
the background of this exercise, the setting allows students
to take pleasure in doing science and not address the climate
crisis directly. This exercise is project-based; its originalityis that part of it takes place outside, in the forest near the
classroom buildings. It is complementary to classes with a
content directly related to climate change, but it brings a
more sensitive and positive dimension. We are also in the
process of designing a popularization video to stage thisapproach to physics in the forest.
This format could be adapted to other experimental disci-
plines, particularly with life sciences. In particular, we plan
688 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Bouquet et al. 688 04 October 2023 22:56:04
to introduce an interdisciplinary component to our own
teaching; physics is not the only tool for understanding
Nature, and using a multidisciplinary approach is preferable
when studying environmental problems.5The same exercise
with supervisors coming from different disciplines (chemis-
try, biology, and ecology) would offer more diverse and
richer views to the students and would naturally open theprojects towards the subjects of environment, sustainability
and climate.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Fabienne Bernard, Herv /C19e
Caps, Marina Carpineti, Jo €el Chevrier, Francesca Chiodi, Ulysse
Delabre, Fun-Man Fung, Jean-Michel Geneveaux, NatachaKrins, Denis Terwagne, Benjamin Vest, and Ma €elle Vilbert who
participated in the group that reﬂected on this teaching during
the international workshop “Reimagine Physics Teaching” in
May 2022. The authors also acknowledge the Research ActionChair on Educational Innovation from Paris-Saclay, held by
Martin Riopel and ﬁnanced by the /C19Ecole Universitaire de
premier cycle de l’universit /C19e Paris Saclay. This chair exists
thanks to Jeanne Parmentier, Isabelle Demachy, and Martin
Riopel, and beneﬁts from the monitoring and methodological
support of Patrice Potvin, Christian B /C19egin, Diane Leduc,
Genevie `ve Allaire-Duquette, and Marine Moyon. This work has
been partially supported by the Chair “Physics Reimagined” led
by Paris-Saclay University and sponsored by AIR LIQUIDE andCr/C19edit Agricole – CIB, and by the Institut Villebon Georges
Charpak.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the environ-
ment, sustainability, and climate change.
b)ORCID: 0000-0002-4854-1063.
c)ORCID: 0000-0003-4266-7834.
d)ORCID: 0009-0003-7947-1859.
e)ORCID: 0009-0007-1234-6606.
1E. Boeker, R. van Grondelle, and P. Blankert, “Environmental physics as a
teaching concept,” Eur. J. Phys. 24(5), S59–S68 (2003).2K. Forinash, “A few ideas for teaching environmental physics,” Phys.
Educ. 51(6), 065024 (2016).
3J. Jouzel, “Sensibiliser et former aux enjeux de la transition /C19ecologique et
du d /C19eveloppement durable dans l’enseignement sup /C19erieur,” in Working
Group Conclusion Submitted on 02/16/2022 to the French Minister of
Higher Education and Research (2022), available at <https://www.en
seignementsup-recherche.gouv.fr/fr/remise-du-rapport-sensibiliser-et-former-aux-enjeux-de-la-transition-ecologique-et-du-developpement-83903 >
4H. C. Busch, “Using environmental science as a motivational tool to teach
physics to non- science majors,” Phys. Teach. 48(9), 578–581 (2010).
5D. A. Kimori and G. Roehrig, “Environmental topics in physics by inquiry
course: Integration models used by physics teachers,” Qualitative Rep.
26(5), 1601–1617 (2021).
6K. Forinash and B. Whitten, “Resource letter TEP-1: Resources for teach-
ing environmental physics,” Am. J. Phys. 87(6), 421–432 (2019).
7J. Bobroff, “The ‘anti-conference’, a collaborative way to create innova-
tive teaching methods,” Conversation, <https://theconversation.com/
the-anti-conference-a-collaborative-way-to-create-in novative-teaching-methods-
190504>(accessed on September 14, 2022).
8B. Vest et al. , “Reimagine physics teaching: A workshop designed to spar-
kle exchanges and creativity,” les cahiers de l’Institut Pascal(unpublished).
9See supplementary material online for an illustrated summary of thecourse and the teachers preparation notes.
10As an example, the inspiration room is presented here: <https://heberge
ment.universite-paris-saclay.fr/supraconductivite/references-sur-la-foret/
?lang=en >
11T. S. Jones and C. R. Richey, “Rapid prototyping methodology in action:
A developmental study,” Educ. Technol. Res. Develop. 48, 63–80 (2000).
12E. K. Nixon and D. Lee, “Rapid prototyping in the instructional design
process,” Performance Improvement Q. 14(3), 95–116 (2001).
13T. A. Blackledge, R. A. Cardullo, and C. Y. Hayashi, “Polarized light
microscopy, variability in spider silk diameters, and the mechanical char-
acterization of spider silk,” Invertebrate Biol. 124(2), 165–173 (2005).
14T. McMahon, “Size and shape in biology,” Science 179(4079), 1201–1204
(1973).
15J. Hattie, Visible Learning for Teachers: Maximizing Impact on Learning
(Routledge, Oxfordshire, 2012).
16P. C. Blumenfeld et al. , “Motivating project-based learning: Sustaining the
doing, supporting the learning,” Educ. Psychol 26(3–4), 369–398 (1991).
17C. Reverdy, “Des projets pour mieux apprendre?,” Dossier d’actual. Veille
Anal. 82, 1–24 (2013), available at <https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/
hal-01657236/document >
18F. Bouquet, J. Bobroff, M. Fuchs-Gallezot, and L. Maurines, “Project-
based physics labs using low-cost open-source hardware,” Am. J. Phys.
85(3), 216–222 (2017).
19F. Harris, “Outdoor learning spaces: The case of forest school,” Area
50(2), 222–231 (2018).
20F. Harris, “Forest school,” CABI Rev. (2022), <https://doi.org/10.1079/
cabireviews202217041 >
689 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Bouquet et al. 689 04 October 2023 22:56:04
