
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| APRIL 01 2022
The analog computer: Beyond the museum artwork, a tool
for studying linear and nonlinear systems 
Marcello Carlà
Am. J. Phys.  90, 263–272 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0009634
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Mid-infrared reflectography for the analysis of pictorial surface layers in artworks
AIP Conference Proceedings  (May 2013)
Artificial intelligence art: Attitudes and perceptions toward human versus artificial intelligence artworks
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 2023)
The style and creativity of southeast Asian calligraphy wood carving
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2023) 04 October 2023 23:06:23
The analog computer: Beyond the museum artwork, a tool for studying
linear and nonlinear systems
Marcello Carl /C18aa)
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Florence, Via G. Sansone 1 50019, Sesto Fiorentino,
Florence, Italy
(Received 14 January 2021; accepted 20 August 2021)
Analog computers have been a valuable resource for a time to solve linear as well as nonlinear
differential equations before being superseded by digital computers. However, interest toward
analog computing has not fully faded away. Though not competitive for accuracy or speed, analogcomputers have the important property of being true physical systems that can be made to behave
according to a given equations set. This aspect makes analog computers interesting educational
tools for hands-on work with real physical systems, where a number of effects, both linear and notlinear, can easily be added at will (a feature not readily available in mechanical systems). This
paper describes the implementation of a modular, very ﬂexible, cheap, yet powerful analog
computer, suitable for student laboratories. As examples of possible applications, a selection oflinear and nonlinear oscillator models are described that can be used in the laboratory to introduce
students to various nonlinear effects.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of
Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0009634
I. INTRODUCTION
We can study the behavior of an electrical or electronic
network by writing down and resolving a system of equa-tions (may be nonlinear but almost always differential) thatstart from the physical principles governing each element of
the network. This is the subject of several ﬁrst or second
year classes and laboratories for physics or engineeringstudents.
The converse also is true: if we have a system of equations
and we are able to assemble an electronic network described bythose equations, then the network, left alone after setting the ini-tial conditions, will behave according to the solution of the sys-tem. We can observe and capture that behavior (i.e., we can seethe equations’ solution, for example, on an oscilloscope). This isthe central point of analog electronic computing.
A detailed history of analog computing is beyond the pur-
pose of this paper. Only a few notes are useful here to outlinea historical reference frame. For the reader interested in con-temporary accounts, historical material is widely availableon the internet.
1,2
After World War II began the era of digital computers.
They were gigantic, expensive, power hungry, and slowmachines. In many cases, their use for solving differentialequations was simply not affordable, let alone for obtainingreal time solutions.
In the same period, the ﬁeld of analog electronics pro-
gressed signiﬁcantly; the vacuum tube summing ampliﬁer
was patented in 1946,
3while the name operational ampliﬁer
was coined in 1947 to describe a circuit used to build a num-ber of modules, each one performing an elementary mathe-matical operation.
4In Ref. 4, several examples were also
given of networks composed of two or more such elementarymodules and capable of solving second or higher order dif-ferential equations.
In parallel, many ingenious devices were being developed
to implement nonlinear functions. See Refs. 5–8for the state
of the art at the time or browse the manual of a top level ana-log computer.
9For some years, this state of affairs made analog comput-
ing the preferred (or the only) choice for affordable real timeresolution of differential equations.
In the following decades, however, digital electronics
grew at a phenomenal rate, yielding minicomputers, personalcomputers, microprocessors, and microcomputers: greaterand greater computing power at smaller and smaller cost andsize. By the end of the 20th century, solving a system of non-linear differential equations numerically using a digital com-puter was, by far, more efﬁcient than using the best analogcomputer. Today, there is no industrial production of analog
computers, and such a machine can no longer be purchased,
only observed in science museums (see, e.g., Ref. 10).
Despite this, the recent scientiﬁc literature shows that
interest in analog computing has not fully faded away. Forexample, a paper published in 1998 dealt exhaustively withthe use of analog computing to study nonlinear dynamicalsystems
11and contained a wide bibliography on the subject.
In following years and in recent specialized literature, analogcomputing has been used to study chaotic systems and tackle
theoretical problems,12–16while there is a continued interest
for educational purposes17and for the development of new
arrangements to improve performances and extend the appli-cation range.18In 2005, the IEEE Control Systems Magazine
devoted an issue to the history of analog computers.2This
continued interest can hardly be justiﬁed today by the superi-ority in terms of performance of the analog computer com-pared to its digital counterpart. It is from an educational
point of view that analog computing mostly continues to be
interesting. Let us consider a physical system, for instance, alinear or nonlinear oscillator, which is certainly one of themost important model systems in a physics curriculum. Thesystem behavior can be obtained either by numerically inte-grating the equations or by working with an analog machine.From the point of view of speed and accuracy, the game isover: numerical integration overwhelms the analog by orders
of magnitude. However, the difference is that the analog
machine isthe physical system, while numerical integration
solves the mathematics that describe the physical system.
263 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 263 04 October 2023 23:06:23
Moreover, an analog machine has to be setup and operated
with the same attention and cleverness required in any physi-cal experiment. As in experimental research, the results,
under the form of an output signal, have to be collected via a
suitable data acquisition system. (Here, it could be an oscil-loscope or a digital computer connected to a signal sampler.)Learning this process is paramount in any experimentalphysicist’s education.
In parallel with the evolution of digital electronics, analog
electronics also has become, by far, more efﬁcient and accu-
rate than half a century ago. It is also affordable at a muchlower cost. Today, an efﬁcient analog network for computingcan be assembled and operated at a cost of a few hundreddollars. Yet it can be used to solve nonlinear differential
equations with complexity limited only by the operator
ingenuity.
For about 25 years, in a laboratory class on analog alec-
tronics for a physics degree at the University of Florence, wehave presented to students some experiments using the ele-mentary building blocks of analog computing (integrators,
summing nodes, and analog four quadrant multipliers) to
introduce them to nonlinear effects.
With this work, we wish to show that analog computing is
worth the effort it requires to be used and should not be con-sidered solely as equipment of historical interest. We would,therefore, like to present a possible implementation of analog
computing for undergraduate laboratory courses and describe
some experiments.
Once linear mechanical oscillators, such as the pendulum
or the mass-spring oscillator, have been introduced in thecurriculum, either in class or in the laboratory, students havethe necessary background to study other oscillators, includ-
ing nonlinear ones. In the analog computer, nonlinear effects
can easily be introduced in a ﬂexible and quantitatively accu-rate manner.
II. AN EDUCATIONAL ANALOG COMPUTER
In the world of analog computing, the implementation of
the proper electronic layout that will evolve along a given
equation set is the equivalent of writing a program for a digi-tal computer.
The basic elements of this code are various electronic
modules, each one comprising inputs and outputs that arerelated by the mathematical operator that the speciﬁc module
implements—in other words, the transfer function of each
module is an elementary math operation. By routing the sig-nal from one module to the next, successive operations canbe applied until the desired program is achieved.
Such an electronic circuit may be fully assembled by the
students. However, this approach would be very time-
consuming. Moreover, it would put the focus on the subtle-
ties and good practice of electronics assembly (an importantﬁeld by itself, but quite another matter) rather than on thephysics itself. In the present case, we have chosen to pre-assemble all operator modules using printed circuit cards of
identical dimensions. Modules are then arranged on a sup-
porting custom-designed motherboard (Fig. 1and the supple-
mentary material).
19We found that this solution was simple,
ﬂexible, and cheap, leaving sufﬁcient room for student inves-tigation, while decreasing the modules’ assembly time.
Moreover, the modules are accessible and exposed. They can
be examined in detail, so that there is no black box in theexperiment. Despite the circuits being exposed, there is noelectrical shock, burn, or ﬁre hazard, because the greatest
voltage that appears between any two points is 30 V with amaximum current of 100 mA.
Each module has multiple pins for input and output.
Connections are made using signal-ground wire pairs, termi-
nated with female pins, and twisted to minimize interfer-ences. Shielded cables and connectors might be used as well,but in the frequency range, and operating at the signal levels
of these circuits, this choice is often unnecessarily
expensive.
Care is required to correctly complete the modules’ inter-
connections. Errors are possible, of course, and studentsshould be urged to check twice their machine before power-
ing it. However, the modules described in this paper are
almost fool-proof, and errors are of no consequence (apart,of course, that the circuit will not behave as expected),because the operational ampliﬁers are protected from shorts
on the output and can sustain voltages a few volt above the
supply rail on the inputs. The only destructive error wouldbe to invert the polarity of the power supply, which is madeimpossible by an asymmetric disposition of the positive andnegative power pins.
III. BUILDING BLOCKS FOR THE STUDENT’S
LABORATORY ANALOG COMPUTER
Using analog computers requires differential equations to
be rewritten as integral equations. This originates from awell-known problem of feedback ampliﬁers: integrators areintrinsically stable and low-noise, whereas differentiators are
potentially unstable and intrinsically noisier, so that they are
not usually used (see Refs. 20and 21for a detailed
discussion).
As will be seen at the start of Sec. IV A, the integral equa-
tions obtained from the differential ones will contain the sumand integration mathematical operators and no more the dif-
ferentiation operator. In analog computers, sum and integra-
tion usually are implemented with two circuits known as thesumming node (Fig. 2) and the Miller integrator (Fig. 3).
Fig. 1. Motherboard with operator modules. Pin sockets on the motherboard
provide mechanical support for the modules, as well as a connection to
ground and to the 615 V power supply given by a DC–DC converter (mid-
dle of the left column). Twisted pairs route signals from module to module
(see the supplementary material (Ref. 19) for more details).
264 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Marcello Carl /C18a 264 04 October 2023 23:06:23
Aside from the two linear operators, two nonlinear opera-
tors have been implemented: the four quadrant multiplier
and the absolute value operator, described in Figs. 4and5,
respectively. There is an inﬁnite variety of nonlinear opera-
tors, but the reason for our selection is that these two opera-
tors are very accurate and easily available. Moreover, the
four quadrant multiplier allows one to implement any integer
power operation, and hence polynomial, which is a far reach-
ing possibility. Although we have not used them, other non-
linear operators that could be added include logarithm and
exponentiation.
A ﬁfth module has been implemented to set initial condi-
tions to the integrators, as required (Fig. 6).
Throughout all experiments, we have used OPA604 or
AD711 operational ampliﬁers, which offer a convenient
compromise between good performances and low cost.
However, plenty of other models are equally well-suited. For
the four quadrant multiplier module, the choice is more lim-
ited: the classical AD633 device has been selected as the
most convenient and suitable. It is a monolithic chip with
two inputs ( vpand vq), designed to yield the output signal
vo¼vp/C1vq=Kwith K¼10 V.
The cost of components for each module is of the order of
$10–15, printed circuit card included.
The traditional through-hole technique has been used
instead of the more modern surface-mount. This makes a
module assembly a matter of a few minutes work, in thereach also of an electronics naive. Another educational
advantage of the old-style technology is the ease with whichsignals internal to a module can be accessed, e.g., with an
oscilloscope probe, for exploration or maintenance.
The printed circuit cards were designed using the open-
source pcb interactive printed circuit board editor, availablefor Unix, Linux, Windows, and Mac systems.
22Cards layout
is available as the supplementary material19both as original
.pcb ﬁles or exported in gerber format, together with shortnotes describing the trimming procedure.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
As mentioned above, the oscillator is certainly one of the
most important concepts in a physicist’s curriculum. Thependulum in mechanics and the LRC resonating circuit in
electromagnetism are the two most classic examples of oscil-
lators that a physicist encounters in the ﬁrst or second yearof the curriculum. They are both physical oscillators that
exhibit some nonlinearity and damping and can be studied in
the laboratory. In a recent paper,
23the educational impor-
tance of being able to adjust all oscillator parameters has
been pointed out. Certainly, the system described in that
paper, based on optical levitation, has the advantage ofbringing the student in touch with interesting and modern
scientiﬁc technologies, but it is rather complex and costly.
Fig. 2. Electronic circuit for a three input summing node. The output voltage is the weighted sum of the input voltages: vo¼/C0 ð k1v1þk2v2þk3v3Þwith
weights ki¼R=Ri. Generally speaking, the summing node can have any reasonable number of inputs with vo¼/C0P
ikivi. Though the OPA604 operational
ampliﬁer is a low offset device, an offset nulling trimmer T(100 kX) has been added for optimum performance. On the right, the practical implementation of
the sum module is shown. In our experimental realization of this circuit, all resistors have 10 k Xvalue, yielding a ﬁxed ki¼1 value. The 615 V power supply
(not shown in the schematics) is ﬁltered on each module by two 4 :7lF electrolytic capacitors, visible in the photo near the power pins (see the supplementary
material (Ref. 19) for more details).
Fig. 3. Circuit for a two input Miller integrator. The output is the weighted sum of integral over time of input voltages: vo¼/C0ÐP
ikividtwith ki¼1=ðRiCÞ.
The same considerations reported in the caption of Fig. 2apply to this circuit, regarding the number of inputs and offset trimming. Terminals marked as Aand
Bare intended to be connected with their counterparts on the module shown in Fig. 6to set initial conditions. The right image is the experimental realization
of a Miller integrator with a ﬁxed 10 nF capacitor and two 10 k Xresistors that can be wired via jumpers to give R1¼5, 10, or 20 k X. Two more inputs are
available that use strip line connectors to hold resistors of other values or a trimmer (see the supplementary material (Ref. 19)).
265 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Marcello Carl /C18a 265 04 October 2023 23:06:23
An analog machine is by far more versatile for experiment-
ing with a wide variety of conditions at a much lower cost.
In Secs. IV A–IV D , we are going to describe a selection
of oscillators, starting from the ideal one and then increasingthe complexity by progressively adding nonlinear terms.
When using an analog computer, it is necessary to have an
external device to capture and display the output of the cir-cuit. In the case of a forced oscillation, a signal generator isalso necessary. One could use a wavefunction generator andan oscilloscope, but we found that a general purpose soundcard is convenient both to generate a forcing signal when
needed and to sample and record the analog machine’s out-
going signal.
A sound card has many advantages: it is inexpensive, is
easily available, and offers multiple synchronous high accu-racy ADC’s and DAC’s with a wide dynamical range and avery good noise level. An external sound card can offer a bitmore ﬂexibility for signal connection and a better protectionagainst electromagnetic noise, but the built-in sound channelthat most recent computers have can be used as well. Allexperiments we are going to describe, except the onedetailed in Sec. IV C, have been performed using an USBsound card (Sound Blaster X-Fi HD) connected to a PC with
24-bit resolution and 48 kHz sampling rate.
High quality software packages like sox
24or audacity,25
capable of interacting with almost every sound card and
audio channel, are freely available on the internet. The maindrawback of a sound card is that its input is AC-coupled and,
hence, cannot be used when signals with DC or very low fre-
quency components are involved (typically less than 10 Hz).Because of this limitation, experiment C has been performed
with a digital oscilloscope (a Tektronix TDS3032B, but most
currently available models with PC connection capability aresuitable, amateur ones included). The main drawbacks of the
digital oscilloscope are the limited dynamic range (typically
50 dB vs more than 100 dB the sound card) and the impossi-bility to acquire a signal in a continuous stream.
A possible alternative is a DAQ board, which typically
offers 16-bit resolution, DC coupling and stream acquisition
at a price of a few hundred dollars. An open source softwarepackage that uses one of several models of DAQ boards and
may be suitable for the kind of experiments reported in this
paper is described in Ref. 26and available in Ref. 27.
A. The linear oscillator
The simplest case is the ideal linear oscillator described
by the differential equation
s
2€xþx¼0: (1)
To solve this second order differential equation with an
analog computer, the standard steps are: (1) split the equa-
tion into a system of two ﬁrst order equations; (2) rewritethem as integral equations, as outlined below:
_x¼y;
s
2_y¼/C0x;)x¼ð
ydtþx0;
s2y¼/C0ð
xdtþy0;(2)
with x0andy0setting the initial conditions.
Hence, the analog machine that corresponds to this system
is composed of two integrators and one single input sum
node with /C01 gain, as shown in Fig. 7. Assigning the role of
Fig. 4. Four quadrant multiplier module. The function is actually performed by the monolithic circuit AD633. The output voltage is vo¼vp/C1vq=K, where Kis
a constant ( K¼10 V). The operating range is a very convenient 610 V for all v’s. For best accuracy, offset voltages at both pandqinputs as well as at the
output are to be zero-trimmed. At the vqinput, a jumper switch (sw) has been provided to change to vo¼/C0 vp/C1vq=K.
Fig. 5. The absolute value circuit. It implements the mathematical function
vo¼jvij.
266 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Marcello Carl /C18a 266 04 October 2023 23:06:23
xto voltage v2at the second integrator output, the voltage at
the ﬁrst integrator output is v1¼/C0s_v2¼/C0s_x, etc. The
experiment is then performed by imposing initial conditions
as mentioned in Sec. IIIand observing how the various sig-
nals vary.
Experience with this circuit is always frustrating. In place of
the expected stationary sinusoidal signal with the characteristics
given by the selected initial conditions, an exponentially increas-
ing or decreasing oscillation is invariably observed. This is aﬁrst important experimental result: a zero in a mathematical
equation can seldom be reproduced as an exact zero in a physi-
cal system. Even using the best quality components to assemblethe modules for the circuit of Fig. 7, some slight nonideal behav-
ior is always present. For example, the Miller integrator output
always contains a small error signal that is proportional to the
input voltage rather than to its integral. In the frequency domain,this implies that a sinusoidal signal applied at the input of an
integrator appears at the output with a nominal 90
/C14phase rota-
tion plus some small deviations.
We may observe the following: (i) The analog computer,
by nature, behaves like a physical system and will nevershow an ideal behavior. (ii) The numerical integration can
go on for a long time and show results close to the behavior
of an ideal system because only after a very long calculationthe cumulative effects of arithmetic rounding make the solu-
tion appreciably deviate from ideality. (iii) Only an analyti-
cal solution can show the true stationary state of an ideallinear system.To be realistic, Eq. (1)for a true physical system should
always be written as
s
2€xþd_xþx¼0; (3)
where the dcoefﬁcient—that expresses the oscillation
damping—can, in practice, be very small indeed, but never
zero. Usually, it is not even possible to predict the sign of d.
In our experience, the better the components’ quality, thecloser dis to zero, and the greater the sign uncertainty, to the
point that two identical circuits can behave differently.
Once this state of affairs has been accepted, one might try
to trim dto zero by adding a small amount of _x(of the proper
sign) to the input of the summing node in order to introduce
a/C0dterm in the equation. The result of this second experi-
ence is frustrating as well. Even when using the best trimmerto adjust the resulting damp to zero, this condition turns out
to be unstable. After a while, the oscillation starts to increase
or decrease in amplitude again, caused by any minimal driftin the component parameters.
All these effects (as well as other ones, like the unavoid-
able noise intrinsic to every resistive component in the cir-
cuit) are akin to measurement errors, a primary concept inevery physics laboratory. Just as it is not possible to get ameasurement of a quantity with inﬁnite accuracy, it is not
possible to set the value of some physical quantity with inﬁ-
nite accuracy. Ultimately, one must accept the evidence thata steady state oscillation in a perfectly linear system is only a
mathematical concept; this is an important lesson for a young
scientist.
B. The almost linear oscillator
In the physical world, we can obtain a stationary oscilla-
tion only if we give up linearity: we must introduce some
amount of nonlinear behavior in our system.
This might be done by simply and roughly introducing a
negative damping in the system, i.e., a negative value for d,
so that the oscillation amplitude will rise exponentially with
time. The oscillation then increases until it must stop because
of the ampliﬁers’ saturation. This arrangement is often usedin the generation of radio signals, but that is another story. In
an analog computer, this must be absolutely avoided. The
ampliﬁers must remain in their prescribed operating range,
Fig. 6. Module to preset the initial voltage across the capacitor of an integrator. Terminals AandBare to be connected with the AandBterminals across the
capacitor in the integrator module of Fig. 3. The relay RL is used with the contact normally closed, i.e., when the relay is not activated, the input of the integra-
tor at Ais forced until output Bis at the voltage set by the trimmer. When relay RL is activated by allowing a current in the solenoid, the contact opens, allow-
ing the integrator to operate in the normal way. This mode of using the relay (i.e., making the circuit start to operate at the relay opening) is importan t to avoid
the effects of the contact rebounces typical of mechanical relay closing. With a fast reed relay, a delay of about 80 ls has been measured between an excitation
current pulse and the corresponding contact opening, and a delay difference less than 10 ls between relays on two different modules. These times are adequate
for most applications. If not, the relay should be replaced with a CMOS switch that can yield switching times of 100 ns or less.
Fig. 7. The ideal linear oscillator. Both integrators have identical time con-stant s¼RC, given by the input resistance Rand feedback capacitor C.
With typical values R¼10 kXandC¼10 nF, one gets s¼100ls, corre-
sponding to an oscillation frequency f¼1=ð2psÞ¼1:59 kHz. Formulas in
the ﬁrst line (in red) describe the relationships among the electrical signals
of each node. The lower expressions (in black) give the correspondence of
the electrical signals with variables of Eq. (1)(second line) or Eq. (2)(third
line).
267 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Marcello Carl /C18a 267 04 October 2023 23:06:23
otherwise the circuit will not model the equations anymore,
and no quantitative result can be obtained.
Nonlinearity must be added to the system with suitable
nonlinear devices that correspond to explicit nonlinear terms
in the equations. One way to obtain this result is to introduce
a cubic term in Eq. (3). This increases the complexity of the
circuit but opens the way to richer physics and is suitable for
an interesting numerical analysis. The new equation, akin to
van der Pol’s equation,28is
s2€x/C0a/C0bs2_x21
K2/C18/C19
s_xþx¼0; (4)
with aandbboth positive quantities; the corresponding cir-
cuit is shown in Fig. 8.
As often with nonlinear differential equations, Eq. (4)does
not admit a closed analytical solution, but if the nonlinearity
is sufﬁciently small, an approximate solution x(t) for the
steady state can easily be obtained through a Fourier expan-
sion. Without a forcing term, i.e., without an additional signal
from an external generator applied to the sum module (as it
will be made in Fig. 14), according to Poincar /C19e–Bendixson
theorem,29x(t) will asymptotically converge to a periodic
function of time, that can be expanded as a Fourier series,
containing a fundamental term sin ðxtþuÞ, along with har-
monics of decreasing amplitude.
Assuming x’AsinðxtþuÞ, we will have _x
’AxcosðxtþuÞ. Using the trigonometric expansion
cos3ðxtþuÞ¼3
4cosðxtþuÞþ1
4cosð3xtþ3uÞ(5)
to express the _x3term, and keeping only the fundamental
and discarding the third harmonic contribution, Eq. (4)
becomess2€x/C0a/C03
4x2s2A2
K2b/C18/C19
s_xþx¼0: (6)
The stationary state, i.e., the zero damping condition, is
obtained at the oscillation amplitude Aat which the coefﬁ-
cient of _xis zero, i.e.,
A¼K
xsﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
4
3abr
’Kﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
4
3abr
; (7)
with the last approximation obtained when considering that,
under the small damping condition, xs’1. With K¼10 V
(the scale factor of the AD633 four quadrant multiplier), and
a desired full scale oscillation amplitude A¼10 V, one
obtains a=b¼3=4. Note that this result does not single-
handedly deﬁne aandb. To determine the absolute values of
these parameters, another condition has to be added, and this
is the amount of nonlinearity, quantiﬁed by b, that we decide
to add to the system. For large values of b, the harmonic con-
tent of the signal will be more important, but the system will
respond faster to perturbations in the oscillation amplitude.For lower values of b, the spectral purity will be greater, but
the system response will be slower.
The machine shown in Fig. 8has been operated with
a¼0.01, a¼0.1, and a¼1, obtained with resistors of
1MX;100 kX, and 10 k X, respectively, at the ainput of the
sum module, and resistors of 0 :75 MX,7 5 kX, and 7 :5kX,
respectively, at the binput (the feedback resistor R(deﬁned
in Fig. 2) is always 10 kX). The rise of the oscillation with
a¼0.1 and a¼1 is shown in Fig. 9. In both cases, the inte-
grators start with 0 V across the capacitor. The noise, con-
stantly present in a physical circuit, ensures that in a
condition of negative damping, the oscillation will alwaysstart. In the right plot, with a¼1, an expert eye can distin-
guish a small signal distortion, stronger in the
/C0s_xterm at
the ﬁrst integrator output (signal 1, blue line), and attenuatedat the second integrator output (signal 2, red line), asexpected. To make the effect more clearly visible, the signal
at the ﬁrst integrator output is shown expanded in Fig. 10
(dashed blue line), together with its three main harmoniccomponents: the ﬁrst (the base frequency), third, and ﬁfthovertones. The table on the right of the plot contains the
numerical values of these harmonic components for the sig-
nals at both integrators output, both measured and obtainedby numerical integration of Eq. (4)on a digital computer.
A much cleaner oscillation is obtained with a¼0.01
(Fig. 11). The left plot shows the amplitude rise (blue solid
line), compared to results from numerical integration (red
Fig. 8. The almost linear oscillator.
Fig. 9. Output voltages from the almost linear oscillator for a¼0.1 (left) and a¼1 (right). The lagging oscillation (1—blue line) is the output from the ﬁrst
integrator ( v1) and the leading oscillation (2—red line) from the second ( v2).
268 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Marcello Carl /C18a 268 04 October 2023 23:06:23
points). The right plot shows a 3 ms interval taken from the
steady state region. Harmonic content is low enough not to
be observable by the naked eye. From spectral analysis, thethird and ﬁfth components’ amplitude are 12 mV and 36 lV,
respectively, at the ﬁrst integrator output. Numerical integra-
tion yields 12 mV as well for the third overtone, but a smaller26lV value for the ﬁfth, with a discrepancy that amounts to
1 ppm of the total amplitude. Here, we are at the limit of the
analog machine possibilities, imposed by its dynamicalrange: the ratio between the full scale and the noise ﬂoor
voltages.
C. The nonharmonic oscillator
Another interesting circuit that can easily be assembled
using the same modular integrators and multipliers as the cir-cuit in Fig. 8is the nonharmonic oscillator, a simpliﬁed ver-
sion of a system sometimes referred to as the Dufﬁng
oscillator.
13
In this circuit, shown in Fig. 12, the cubic term has been
moved from the damping to the potential expression, yield-
ing the equation
s2€xþas_xþx3
K2¼0: (8)
Signals obtained according to this equation-circuit are
shown in Fig. 13with initial conditions set to 10 V for xand
to 0 V for /C0s_x. The most important feature of this signal isthat the oscillation frequency changes with the amplitude.
The oscillator with the Dufﬁng potential is not isochronous,
a property, as it is well known, speciﬁc to the harmonicpotential.
D. The driven nonharmonic oscillator
The shift in the resonance frequency of a slightly anhar-
monic forced oscillator is a well-known and well-studied
effect in several ﬁelds of physics. A typical example can befound in Ref. 30. At high amplitudes, the resonance curve
can be fully distorted, giving rise to discontinuities and to
a hysteresis loop during a forward and reverse frequencyscan.
In a paper published a few years ago,
31guitar strings were
described as examples of nonlinear resonators. From models
and measurements, it resulted that the behavior of the stringwas fairly well described by the equation
€xþx
0_xbþcj_xj ðÞ þx021þ/C15x2 ðÞ x¼FðtÞ (9)
over a wide range of oscillation amplitudes (except for the
largest ones). In the equation, the coefﬁcient baccounts for
the usual linear damping and the term cj_xjfor the nonlinear
ﬂuid dynamics damping.
It is physically insightful to study how such an experiment
can be replicated using an analog machine, given that the
analog machine gives us more control over each variable in
the equation.
Fig. 10. Expanded view of v1(ﬁrst integrator output) from the steady-state region in the right plot of Fig. 9, together with its main harmonic content. The
dashed (blue) line is the measured signal; other lines, orange, green, and red in the decreasing order of amplitude, are, respectively, its ﬁrst, thir d, and ﬁfth
overtones. This harmonic content has been computed from v1by a least squares ﬁt of the v1signal with the function fðtÞ¼A0þP
n¼1;3;5AnsinðnxtþunÞ
with An,un, and xadjustable parameters. The residual difference between the measured signal and f(t) (the dotted black line) proves that the considered com-
ponents are the most signiﬁcant ones. A fast Fourier transform in this case would give a full spectrum of the measured signal with all the overtone compo nents
but with a reduced accuracy because of truncation errors. The amplitudes (in V) at the ﬁrst and second integrators output are shown in the table right, both for
the measured signal (M) and the numerically computed one (C).
Fig. 11. Amplitude rise and steady state oscillation of the xvariable (voltage at the second integrator output) in the circuit of Fig. 8with a¼0.01.
269 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Marcello Carl /C18a 269 04 October 2023 23:06:23
The analog machine shown in Fig. 14has been assembled,
after rewriting Eq. (9)in the form
s2€xþs_xbþsj_xjc
K/C18/C19
þ1þx2/C15
K2/C18/C19
x¼gEðtÞ;(10)
to take into account that v1actually corresponds to /C0s_x, not
to_x, with x0¼1=s, and writing c=Kand/C15=K2instead of c
and/C15to have all constants dimensionless and all variables
well scaled for the analog computer’s operation.
Values for sandbcan be imported directly from the
results of the experiment with the guitar string and have beenset as close to the reported values as allowed by componentsavailability: s¼475ls and b¼6:70/C210
/C04vs reported
483:6ls and 6 :75/C210/C04.
Values for the cand /C15constants are more intriguing, as
they are linked to the scale that is selected for xands_x.T o
have the analog machine work over the full available dynam-ical range, i.e., 610 V for both xands_x,/C15andcare to be
chosen in order to make the terms x
2/C15=K2andsj_xjc=Khave
the same values as the corresponding quantities in the paper(8:1/C210
/C03and 1 :98/C210/C03, respectively, at the maximum
peak level). At full scale, both x=K¼1 and s_x=K¼1, so
/C15¼8:1/C210/C03andc¼1:98/C210/C03.
Due to components availability, we have chosen c¼1:8
/C210/C03, while /C15has ﬁrst been chosen to be 8 :3/C210/C03before
being increased to 1 :0/C210/C02for a better agreement with
results reported in Ref. 31(see later).
Measurements have been performed following a similar
procedure as in Ref. 31. The forcing signal E(t) has been
generated using one channel of the sound card, calibratingthegcoefﬁcient to excite a 610 V amplitude for the v
1and
v2oscillations. The quantity that corresponds to the guitar
string speed in the original experiment is voltage v1. Voltage
v2has been measured as well; it corresponds to the string
displacement.
With the guitar string, only the resonance frequency can
be tuned, within a limited range, other parameters being con-strained. Using an analog machine, it is possible to modeland study the system at will, even considering each param-
eter at a time: by unplugging the v
/C15and vcsignals, a fully lin-
ear resonator is obtained; adding vc, the effect of the ﬂuid
dynamics damping can be observed and so on. Some resultsare described in Fig. 15.
The behavior of the complete network is reported in
Fig. 16. The difference between consecutive curve ampli-
tudes is smaller than the excitation step size because of the
ﬂuid dynamics damping: when the oscillation amplitude
becomes greater, the effective ﬁgure of merit of the resonatordecreases. This can better be seen in the left-top inset ofFig.16that reports the ratio of peak amplitude over excita-
tion signal as a function of the excitation intensity. The blueline has been drawn using the results reported from leastsquares ﬁt in Ref. 31; red points are values from this experi-
ment, scaled to make the leftmost point to coincide withthe line.
The most impressive aspect of Fig. 16is the curve defor-
mation produced by the potential’s anharmonicity: the peakbends rightward, until an hysteresis loop appears between
the forward and reverse frequency scans. Changing the sign
of the /C15coefﬁcient, the curve would bend leftward. This is a
freedom practically unavailable with most nonlinear physicaloscillators, where nonlinearity is linked to some unmodiﬁ-able system property.
To make a comparison with data obtained with the guitar
string, three horizontal dashed black bars are reported in theplot. The upper bar (labeled 1) corresponds to the frequencyshift of the resonance peak in the guitar experiment, from theasymptotic low level resonance to the highest oscillationlevel ( /C241:4 Hz). The experiment with the analog machine
has been repeated a few times with slightly different values
of/C15, and the one has been chosen that yields the best agree-
ment with data in Ref. 31. (The residual disagreement is
about 10%.)
It is worth noting that in Ref. 31, the /C15parameter was also
adjusted to stretch rightward the curves obtained with themathematical model and make the shift of the highest oscil-lation peak coincide with the experiment.
The difference in the value of /C15used in Ref. 31
(/C15¼8:1/C210
/C03) and the value of /C15used to ﬁnd agreement in
the circuit response ( /C15¼1:0/C210/C02) may be due to the fact
that in Ref. 31, the mathematical solution was obtained
through an expansion to ﬁrst order of Eq. (9), discarding all
overtone content, while the work of the analog machine is adirect integration of the whole equation. This point may beworth further investigation. However, most importantly,
Fig. 12. The damped Dufﬁng oscillator with cubic restoring force.
Fig. 13. A decaying signal from the Dufﬁng oscillator with s¼100ls and
a¼1/12.
Fig. 14. An analog machine that emulates the guitar string behavior as
described in Ref. 31. The signal at the ﬁrst integrator output is v1¼/C0s_x
¼/C01=sÐ
ðbv1þv3Þdtthat amounts to the input s2€x¼/C0bs_x/C0cs2_xj_xj=
K/C0xð1þ/C15x2=K2Þ/C0gEðtÞ[see Eq. (10)]. The black and red labels pairing
on each node give the correspondence among electrical signals and terms in
Eq.(10).
270 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Marcello Carl /C18a 270 04 October 2023 23:06:23
both solutions show the same macroscopic disagreement
with the guitar string experiment at the highest oscillation
amplitudes: the middle bar (labeled 2) shows the width ofthe hysteresis loop in the guitar experiment, that is about
0:67 Hz. The corresponding value from the analog machine
results is less than half that value ( /C240:31 Hz) in rough agree-
ment with results from mathematical computations in Ref.
31(/C240:25 Hz, lower bar, labeled 3).
This comparison conﬁrms the limits of the model
expressed in Eqs. (9)and(10) (and the circuit in Fig. 14)t o
describe the physics of the guitar string at the highest oscilla-
tion amplitudes.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The experiments reported in this paper are only a few
examples of an inﬁnite variety of physical oscillators, whose
knowledge and familiarity with are valuable in the curriculumof a physicist, both an experimentalist or a theorist.The experiment described in Sec. IV D is probably the most
fascinating of the four, because it opens a view on some unex-pected behaviors. The experiments described in Sec. IV A
with the linear oscillator, instead, make clear the differencebetween the numerical and analytical solutions of the equa-tions of a physical system and the direct observation of thesystem behavior, hence, the usefulness of the analog computer
approach. In Sec. IV A, it was noted that experience with the
circuit in Fig. 7is frustrating. This is not meant to imply that
the circuit is not good enough to tackle the linear oscillatorproblem in full; rather, the opposite. It is the mathematics thatshow in Eqs. (1)and(3)an idealized and unrealistic image of
the world we make in our mind. A physical system behaveslike the circuit in Fig. 7, frustrating such a simplistic image
and forcing a more complex view: a steady state oscillation ina linear system is only a mathematical concept; the real worldneeds nonlinearity to be stationary.
As shown by the examples of oscillators, the analog com-
puter is a very ﬂexible and inexpensive device to expose stu-dents to a wide variety of experimental situations, either in alinear or nonlinear world. There is no doubt that mathematicswill always be the master way to the full analysis of a physi-cal system behavior, but the experimental approach is a wayto stimulate an understanding of aspects of physics that mustbe accounted for by the mathematical model.
a)Electronic mail: carla@ﬁ.infn.it
1See <http://analogmuseum.org/english/ >or<http://www.rsp-italy.it/
Electronics/Analog%20computing/index.htm >.
2IEEE Control Systems, Issue 3, June, 2005 <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
stamp/stamp.jsp?tp ¼&arnumber ¼1432585 >.
3Karl D. Swartzel, Jr. and N. J. Teaneck, “Summing ampliﬁer,” U.S. Patent
2,401,779 (June 11, 1946).
4John R. Ragazzini, Robert H. Randall, and Frederick A. Russell, “Analysis ofproblems in dynamics by electronic circuits,” Proc. IRE 35(5), 444–452 (1947).
5M. G. Hartley, An Introduction to Electronic Analog Computers (John
Wiley & Sons, London, 1962).
6Norman R. Scott, Analog and Digital Computer Technology (McGraw-
Hill-Kogakusha, Tokyo, 1960).
7F. H. Raven, Automatic Control Engineering (McGraw-Hill-Kogakusha,
Tokyo, 1961).
8John D. Ryder, Engineering Electronics (McGraw-Hill-Kogakusha,
Tokyo, 1957).
9The original operators manual of the EAI TR-48 analog computer can befound at, <www.bitsavers.org/pdf/eai/tr-48/EAI_TR-48_Analog_Computer_
Operators_Manual_Oct63.pdf orhttps://usermanual.wiki/Document/
EAITR48AnalogComputerOperatorsManualOct63.669687125 >.
10See, for a few images of the EAI TR-48 analog computer, <https://www.
computerhistory.org/revolution/analog-computers/3/152/430 >.
Fig. 15. Operation of the circuit of Fig. 14at different signal amplitudes with the vcsignal operative and v/C15unplugged (left plot) and v/C15operative and vc
unplugged (right plot). The quantity vo=viis the ratio of amplitudes of v1and the forcing signal gEðtÞ. In a linear oscillator, its peak value corresponds to the
ﬁgure of merit Q. The left plot displays the effect of ﬂuid dynamics damping alone. The lowest curve corresponds to the greatest signal, and the highest curve
to the lowest signal with a difference of 8 :5 dB in the input signal intensity between successive curves: the lowering of the Qwhen the signal amplitude
increases is clearly observed. The right plot shows the bending and the hysteresis loops due to the cubic term in the potential. The rightmost curve cor responds
to the highest oscillation amplitude ( 610 V); going left, other curves are obtained with the forcing signal reduced by 3, 6, and 51 dB.
Fig. 16. Response from the circuit of Fig. 14when all nonlinear effects are
present. Solid (red) curves have been obtained with forward frequency
scans, dashed (blue) curves with reverse scans. The input signal vifor the
highest curve has been adjusted for a 10 V peak oscillation amplitude. For
lower curves, videcreases by 3 dB per curve down to /C015 dB, and thereaf-
ter, by /C06 dB per curve down to /C051 dB. The vertical dotted bar marks the
asymptotic resonance frequency at zero amplitude; the top-left inset reports
the oscillation peak values (see the text for meaning and description); the
three horizontal dashed bars report values from Ref. 31for the highest oscil-
lation curve: (1) resonance shift from the asymptotic low level value; (2)
width of the hysteresis loop in the guitar experiment; (3) width of the hyster-
esis loop obtained from mathematical computations.
271 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Marcello Carl /C18a 271 04 October 2023 23:06:23
11D. G. Luchinsky, P. V. E. McClintock, and M. I. Dykman, “Analogue
studies of nonlinear systems,” Rep. Prog. Phys. 61, 889–997 (1998).
12J. C. Sprott, “Simple chaotic systems and circuits,” Am. J. Phys. 68,
758–763 (1999).
13B. K. Jones and G. Trefan, “The Dufﬁng oscillator: A precise electronic
analog chaos demonstrator for the undergraduate laboratory,” Am. J. Phys.
69, 464–469 (2001); a short and clear review of the Dufﬁng oscillator
can be found also on Wikipedia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dufﬁng_
equation >.
14Edward H. Hellen, “Real-time ﬁnite difference bifurcation diagrams from
analog electronic circuits,” Am. J. Phys. 72, 499–502 (2004).
15Fariha Ghaffar, Sajid Iqbal, Umer Shahid, and Muhammad Abdullah,
“Implementation of a BJT based jerk circuit: route to chaos with multiple
attractors,” in 9th IEEE Annual Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics &
Mobile Communication Conference (UEMCON) (IEEE, New York, 2018).
16E. Tama /C20sevicˇi/C22ut_e, A. Tama /C20sevicˇius, G. Mykolaitis, and S. Bumelien _e,
“Analogue electrical circuit for simulation of the Dufﬁng-Holmes equa-
tion,” Nonlinear Anal.: Modell. Control 13(2), 241–252 (2008).
17Matt Schmitthenner, “Modeling the Dufﬁng equation with an analog computer”
<http://physics.wooster.edu/JrIS/Files/Schmitthenner_Web_ Article.pdf >.
18Edgar Perez, Colleen Werkheiser, Alex Striff, and Lucas Illing,
“Exploring delay dynamics with a programmable electronic delay circuit,”
Am. J. Phys. 88, 1006–1011 (2020).
19See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/10.0009634 for more details about the modules assembling, the
trimming procedures and the ﬁles for the printed circuit boards production.
20Sergio Franco, Design with Operational Ampliﬁers and Analog Integrated
Circuits (McGraw-Hill, Tokyo, 2002), pp. 19–20.
21George Clayton and Steve Winder, Operational Ampliﬁers , 5th ed.
(Newnes, Oxford, 2003), pp. 146–168.22See, for the ofﬁcial development site of pcb, <https://sourceforge.net/
projects/pcb/ >.
23Javier Tello Marmolejo, Oscar Isaksson, Remigio Cabrera-Trujillo, Niels
C. Giesselmann, and Dag Hanstorp, “A fully manipulable damped drivenharmonic oscillator using optical levitation,” Am. J. Phys. 88(6), 490–498
(2020).
24See, for the ofﬁcial development site of SoX, <https://sourceforge.net/
projects/sox/ >.
25See, for the ofﬁcial development site of Audacity, <https://www.audacityteam.
org/>.
26Giovanni Aloisi, Federico Bacci, Marcello Carl /C18a, David Dolci, and
Leonardo Lanzi, “Implementation on a desktop computer of the real time
feedback control loop of a scanning probe microscope,” Rev. Sci. Instrum.
79, 113702 (2008).
27See, for a software package (spm2), originally designed for the real time
control of a scanning tunnel microscope, but easily usable for many data
stream acquisition processes, <http://spm.polosci.uniﬁ.it/ >.
28Balth van der Pol Jun, “LXXXVIII. On relaxation-oscillations,” London,
Edinburgh, Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci. 2, 978–992 (1926).
29To put it simply, Poincar /C19e–Bendixson theorem states the conditions under
which the solutions of a plane nonlinear system will approach a closed sta-
tionary cycle. It is an important topic in the study of nonlinear dynamical
systems. See, e.g., D. K. Arrowsmith and C. M. Place, Dynamical
Systems: Differential Equations, Maps and Chaotic Behavior (Chapman &
Hall, London, 1992).
30Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifchitz, Mecanique , Deuxie `me /C19edition ( /C19Editions
MIR, Moscow, 1966), p. 28.
31Marcello Carl /C18a and Samuele Straulino, “Measurements on a guitar string
as an example of a physical nonlinear driven oscillator,” Am. J. Phys.
85(8), 587–595 (2017).
272 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Marcello Carl /C18a 272 04 October 2023 23:06:23
