
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| SEPTEMBER 01 2022
The basic concepts determining electromagnetic shielding 

Guy A. E. V andenbosch
Am. J. Phys.  90, 672–681 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0087295
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Clarification of basic concepts for electromagnetic interference shielding ef fectiveness
J. Appl. Phys.  (December 2021)
MITICA intermediate electrostatic shield: Concept design, development, and first experimental tests
identification
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2018)
RSMASS ‐ D: Reactor and shield mass minimization models
AIP Conference Proceedings  (January 1991) 04 October 2023 23:16:02
The basic concepts determining electromagnetic shielding
Guy A. E. Vandenboscha)
Department of Electrical Engineering, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10,
3001 Leuven, Belgium
(Received 3 February 2022; accepted 28 June 2022)
Shielding involves much more than just putting a conductive screen in between an emitting source
and a susceptible device. Starting from Maxwell’s equations, the concept of electromagnetic
shielding is formally explained. The physical working mechanisms behind the two basic forms ofshielding, electric ﬁeld and magnetic ﬁeld shielding, are given, and the link between them at higher
frequencies is clariﬁed. Several aspects, like the effect of gridding or weaving a shield, the effect of
the ﬁnite size of a shield, and the penetration through the metal of a shield, are discussed based onvery simple canonical shielding topologies that can be solved analytically. Although the classical
paradigm to explain shielding based on the notions of skin depth and eddy current is not followed,
conceptual links with this classical paradigm are explained.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license by
American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0087295
I. INTRODUCTION
In the minds of most scientists and engineers, electromag-
netic shielding involves putting an electromagnetic screen,
i.e., a shield, between a source of electromagnetic waves and
a susceptible device. This technique is widespread amongexperimentalists, technicians, and designers of equipmentand measurement setups. Electromagnetic shielding is alsoimportant in life outside of the laboratory. For example, thesteel reinforcement of concrete walls and ﬂoors partially
shields the inside of buildings from the mobile phone wire-
less networks deployed outside, which explains the typicallylower signal level indoors. Also, shielding is one of the mostbasic drivers of the EMC industry.
1,2EMC (ElectroMagnetic
Compatibility) is the study of the simultaneous functioningof electric and/or electronic devices in each other’s
neighborhood.
Electromagnetic shielding is commonly taught in physics
and engineering curricula. At higher frequencies, the conceptof both electric and magnetic shielding is often explainedstarting from the conﬁguration involving a plane wave inci-dent on a metal screen.
3,4In some cases, this may lead to
incorrect interpretations as pointed out by Fahy et al.5
Solving Maxwell’s equations for this simple geometry yields
the coefﬁcients of reﬂection and transmission. It is easilyshown that for good metal screens, the reﬂection is veryhigh, and the transmission is very low, leading to goodshielding properties. Although this approach is educationally
sensible, unfortunately it does not give the student a thor-
ough understanding of many aspects that are crucial in thepractical application of shielding when designing electronicsystems. In the simple “plane wave understanding” of shield-ing, many questions are completely left unanswered.Questions as “Is there a difference in behavior of a screen at
low and high frequencies?,” “Does shielding work only for
two-dimensional screens?,” “How large is the spatial zoneshielded by a screen?,” “Is electric and magnetic shieldingalways the same, as in this simple plane wave case?” cannotbe answered based solely on the plane wave explanation.
At lower frequencies, the concept of eddy currents is used
mainly to explain magnetic shielding.
6Eddy currents are
electric currents ﬂowing in loops within conductors due to achanging magnetic ﬁeld in the conductors. They aregoverned by Faraday’s law of induction. Shielding is then
based on the fact that this current swirls in such a way as tocreate an induced magnetic ﬁeld that opposes the phenome-
non that created it, resulting in a certain level of magnetic
shielding. For the novice, this low-frequency paradigminvokes other questions: “Does this mechanism also generateelectric shielding?,” “What is the relation between the inci-
dent and reﬂected (plane) wave description and the eddy cur-
rent description?,” etc.
The result is that the novice physicist or engineer who is
confronted with an electromagnetic interference problem
may just try to put “some” screen in between the source and
the “problematic” device in the hope that the ﬁeld levels willbe reduced sufﬁciently in order to solve the problem.
In this paper, the basic working mechanisms of electromag-
netic shielding are explained based on the laws of electromag-
netism. The presentation is completely different from what istraditionally taught and leads to a much more robust under-standing of the basic phenomena involved. The approach fol-
lowed in this paper allows correct assessment of many
practical situations: Those where shielding is already occur-ring or where it has to be applied in order to solve a practical
interference problem. Shielding geometries that are discussed
include conducting wires, woven shields, and solid screens,and both penetration through and diffraction around shields
are considered. Concrete calculations are based on very sim-
ple topologies that can be solved analytically: the simplestraight wire, a raster of parallel straight wires, and a conduct-ing half plane. To the knowledge of the author, the paradigm
followed in this paper has never been published before. Most
didactic papers on the topic consider electrostatic casesonly.
7–9However, electrostatic shielding is not as important
in daily life compared to screening of non-zero frequency
ﬁelds. Readers looking for more advanced treatments of prac-tical shielding problems may wish to consult the IEEE
Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility .10,11
II. THE BASIC EQUATIONS
All electromagnetic phenomena can be described by
Maxwell’s laws, expressed in the vector ﬁelds E(electric
ﬁeld) and B(magnetic ﬁeld). In general, these ﬁelds depend
on the coordinates ( x,y,z) and on time t. For simplicity,
672 Am. J. Phys. 90(9), September 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 672 04 October 2023 23:16:02
these dependencies are not explicitly mentioned further. In
time-harmonic situations (i.e., in the frequency domain with
the time-harmonic convention ejxt) and in integral form,
these equations are
þ
cE/C1dC¼/C0jxðð
SB/C1dS; (1)
þ
cB/C1dC¼jxðð
SelE/C1dSþðð
SlðJindþJsoÞ/C1dS
¼ðð
SðjxeþrÞlE/C1dSþðð
SlJso/C1dS; (2)
where Sis an arbitrary surface in space and Cits contour.
Here, J¼JindþJsois the electric volume current density,
which is also a vector ﬁeld depending on ( x,y,z), and which
can be written as the sum of an imposed source current Jso,
typically a current source injecting current into the system,
and a current Jind¼rE, the Ohmic current density induced
by the electric ﬁeld in the conductor. The ﬁelds are, thus,“generated” by the source current J
so. The materials are
assumed to be linear, homogenous, isotropic, and time-
invariant and have permittivity ( e), permeability ( l), and
conductivity ( r) that are frequency independent in the fre-
quency band considered. Note that in (1)and(2), the permit-
tivity, permeability, and conductivity are scalar functionsthat may vary over space, which means that they have to stay
part of the integrands. The result is that these expressions
can be applied without modiﬁcation, even when crossingmaterial boundaries. The differential form of Maxwell’s
equations for the considered materials is
r/C2E¼/C0jxB; (3)
r/C2B¼ðjxeþrÞlEþlJ
so: (4)
III. SHIELDING EFFECTIVENESS
Traditionally, the quality of shielding is expressed with
the parameter shielding effectiveness (SE). It is the ratio of
the ﬁeld in the absence of the shield (also called the incidentﬁeld) to the ﬁeld in the presence of the shield
SE dBðÞ¼20 log
10SEðlinearÞ ½/C138 ¼ 20 log10/C12/C12/C12/C12Finc
Fsh/C12/C12/C12/C12;(5)
where Fis the ﬁeld. This parameter can be deﬁned both for
the electric ﬁeld (electric shielding, F¼E) and the magnetic
ﬁeld (magnetic shielding, F¼B).
IV. ELECTRIC SHIELDING
The line of reasoning for electric shielding, i.e., shielding
of the electric ﬁeld, starts with Ohm’s law
Jind¼rE; (6)
which leads to a time-averaged dissipated power density in
the conductor of
ploss¼1
2E/C1Jind¼rjEj2
2: (7)Since energy and power quantities have to stay ﬁnite, in
the limit that the conductivity goes to inﬁnity, the electric
ﬁeld has to go to zero. This leads to the well-known result
that in a perfect conductor, the electric ﬁeld is zero, andinside a shield with very large conductivity, the electric ﬁeldis nearly zero.
The second step in the line of reasoning relates the ﬁelds
inside the shield to the ﬁelds just outside the shield. ApplyingFaraday’s law (1)to the geometry in Fig. 1for a height dh
and a length dlin the limit both going to zero, we obtain
ðE
1t/C0E2tÞdl¼/C0jxd/¼/C0jxB1tdldh
2þB2tdldh
2/C18/C19
;
(8)
where Eitis the component of the electric ﬁeld parallel to dl
in region i¼1;2 and Bitis the component of the magnetic
ﬁeld also tangential to this surface and simultaneously nor-mal to the loop. For a vanishing dh, the magnetic ﬂux d/
through the elementary surface is vanishing. It follows that
the electric ﬁeld tangential to and just outside the shield isthe same as this ﬁeld just inside, which is nearly zero. Thepractical result is that a shield indeed makes the electric ﬁeldtangential to it very small just outside the shield.
It is very important to emphasize that the previous line of
reasoning does not involve frequency. For real-life conduc-tors with large but ﬁnite conductivity, electric shieldingworks down to zero frequency, i.e., DC.
It is also important to emphasize that this line of reasoning
can be applied not only in the case of a screen, i.e., a two-dimensional shield, but also in the case of a conducting wire,further called a one-dimensional shield. A one-dimensionalshield shields its immediate environment from electric ﬁeldcomponents along its direction.
Note that the notions “in front of” and “behind” the screen
are irrelevant for the line of reasoning followed up to now.In principle, a shield shields both just in front of it and justbehind it. These notions become important when the actualsize of the spatial zone in which the ﬁeld is shielded is con-sidered. The size of the shielded region depends very muchon the exact geometry of the shield and the frequency. Thestudy of a few well-selected canonical cases is ideal to pro-vide a very good physical insight in this matter. In the rest of
Fig. 1. (Color online) A ﬂat elementary surface dSwith length dland height
dhcrossing the boundary between a shield (medium 2) and free space
(medium 1).
673 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Guy A. E. Vandenbosch 673 04 October 2023 23:16:02
Sec. III, we will systematically study the size of the zone in
space that is shielded. In each section, one speciﬁc phenome-
non is discussed. Unless speciﬁed otherwise, we will only
consider cases where the shield consists of perfectly con-ducting material. This approximation simpliﬁes reasoning
without signiﬁcantly compromising the validity in more gen-
eral cases.
A. Size of the shielded region for long 1D shields
The ﬁrst canonical case is a plane wave hitting a very long
thin wire of radius a, as in Fig. 2. This case is considered
because it clearly illustrates the fact that shielding is not
always linked to 2D screens. The direction of incidence isnormal to the wire, and the polarization of the incident elec-
tric ﬁeld is parallel with the wire. If the polarization is nor-
mal to the wire, there will be no shielding and the planewave will not be affected.
Note that the shielding problem considered here is funda-
mentally different from the hollow cylinder problem consid-
ered by Aguirregabiria.
12The problem considered is the
shielding at the outside of a wire, not inside a hollow wire
(or cylinder), and at arbitrary frequencies, not in the quasi-
static limit. We will assume that the wire is very thin, i.e.,ka/C281 with k¼xﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃlepbeing the wavenumber of the
medium in which the wire is embedded (in most cases air or
vacuum) and inﬁnitely conducting.
We know already that within the wire, the electric ﬁeld is
zero, and in its immediate neighborhood, the electric ﬁeld in
the direction of the wire is “shielded” and, thus, very small.
However, how large is the zone where it is shielded?
We know that the incident plane wave induces a current in
the wire. This current generates a so-called scattered ﬁeld. In
the wire, this scattered ﬁeld compensates the incident ﬁeld
completely, so that the total ﬁeld becomes zero there.However, it is straightforward to see that due to the cylindri-
cal symmetry, outside the wire this scattered ﬁeld is actually
a cylindrical wave propagating away from the wire. Themain component of this scattered wave is analyticallyknown. Outside the wire, it behaves as the Hankel function
of second kind and order zero, i.e., H
2
0ðkrÞ, with rbeing the
distance from the axis of the wire. The proof is easily given.
We start from the source-free Helmholtz wave equation forthe electric ﬁeld
r
2Eþk2E¼0: (9)
Writing in cylindrical coordinates yields
@2E
@r2þ1
r@E
@rþ1
r2@2E
@u2þ@2E
@z2þk2E¼0: (10)
The problem is uniform in the zdirection, which means
that the derivative with respect to zis zero. The solution can
be written as a superposition of sinusoidal modes in the u
direction. For each of these modes, (10) is transformed into
the differential equation for the corresponding Bessel
functions. The Hankel functions of the ﬁrst kind can imme-
diately be excluded since they represent waves propagatinginward toward the wire from inﬁnity. This is the so-called“radiation boundary condition.” This leaves the contributions
ðC
mccosðmuÞþCmssinðmuÞÞH2
mðkrÞwith CmcandCmsbeing
unknown coefﬁcients that need to be determined for everymode m. They can be rigorously calculated from the second
boundary condition, which states that at the surface of the
wire the total z-directed electric ﬁeld needs to be zero since
the wire is perfectly conducting. Projection of this boundarycondition onto the separate sinusoidal modes splits this over-all equation into equations per mode mthat are easily solved.
For the zeroth order mode, this equation is
ð
2p
0ðEpw
zejkasinuþC0cH2
0ðkaÞÞdu¼0; (11)
so that
C0c¼/C0ð2p
0Epw
zejkasinudu
2pH2
0ðkaÞ
¼/C0Epw
z
pH2
0ðkaÞðp
0cosðkasinuÞdu
¼/C0Epw
zJ0ðkaÞ
H2
0ðkaÞ: (12)
For very small wire diameters ka/C281, only the zeroth order
mode gives a non-negligible contribution at distances thatare large compared to a. Indeed, all the other modes yield
multi-pole like currents ﬂowing within a very small wire
cross section, which means that the ﬁelds due to the poles of
the multi-pole for the largest part cancel each other. The totalﬁeld a bit further away is, thus, completely formed by thesuperposition of a plane wave and a cylindrical wave
E
total
zðr;uÞ¼Epw
zejkrsinuþC0cH2
0ðkrÞ: (13)
The zone where the electric ﬁeld can be considered as
shielded is determined by the interference patterns betweenthe plane and the cylindrical waves. In Fig. 3, this interfer-
ence pattern is illustrated along the direction of the plane
wave. It is seen that behind the wire, the electric ﬁeld is mar-
ginally reduced over a respectable region. “In front” of the
 Fig. 2. (Color online) Plane wave hitting a long thin conducting wire. Iis
the current induced in the wire.
674 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Guy A. E. Vandenbosch 674 04 October 2023 23:16:02
wire, this zone is much smaller. There is even a small zone
where the ﬁeld is increased by more than 10%. The physical
reason for this is the fact that in front of the wire, the plane
wave and the cylindrical wave travel in opposite directions,
while behind the wire, they propagate in the same direction,in this way showing a destructive type of interference over a
much larger distance. The main conclusion, however, is that
considerable shielding is achieved only in the immediate
neighborhood of the wire. There, using small argument series
expansions for the Bessel functions, the total electric ﬁeld
can be approximated by E
total
zðrÞ/C25Epw
zð1/C0lnðkrÞ=lnðkaÞÞ,
which yields a shielding of 90% at kr/C25ðkaÞ0:9/C250:016 in
Fig. 3. At a distance of k=32 in the transverse direction, this
approximation yields a shielding of only 3.8 dB.
For a wire with ﬁnite conductivity r, the reasoning has to
be generalized. For a perfect conductor, all the current is on
the surface of the wire, but when the conductivity is ﬁnite,
the current extends into the bulk of the wire. The outgoingcylindrical wave is generated by a current Iinduced on the
wire by the incident plane wave (as indicated in Fig. 2).
Now, the second boundary condition can be obtained by
imposing J¼rE
total
zin the wire. Integrating this equation
over the cross section of the wire leads to an equation in
terms of the current I. This equation can be solved, and the
total ﬁeld distribution can then be calculated. If the wire
radius is much larger than the skin depth, the current isnearly the same as for a perfect conductor, and thus, the
shielding is nearly the same. If the wire radius is much smaller
than the skin depth, the current density is nearly constantacross the wire cross section, but the integrated current is
smaller so the shielding is worse. The criterion to have similar
shielding properties as for a perfectly conducting wire is,
thus, the ratio of skin depth to wire radius. The skin depth
is found from d¼(2q/xl)
1/2. For copper, q¼1.7/C210/C08Xmandl/C24l0¼4p/C210/C07N/A2, so for a frequency of 1 MHz,
d¼0.07 mm. This means that at a frequency of 1 MHz, copper
wire with a radius of 0.5 mm carries a current Ithat is almost
the same as in the case of the perfectly conducting wire and,
therefore, has similar shielding properties, but at a frequency of1 kHz, the shielding will be reduced.
This kind of shielding is seen in printed circuit boards
(PCBs), i.e., the green boards that are found in almost any
electronic device. Sensitive subsystems are put in the middle
of the board, where there is a small shielded zone created bythe 1D metal traces near the edges of the PCB.
B. Size of the shielded region for a periodic array of long
1D shields
In many cases, shields are used that do not consist of solid
conductive metal but, for example, of gridded or woven
metal wires. The darkish glass front of a microwave ovenactually contains a gridded shield. At lower frequencies,
reinforced concrete in buildings forms a very effective shield
thanks to the gridded steel reinforcements. At higher fre-quencies, it doesn’t. The outer conductor of most coaxial
cables is actually woven. What is the effect of gridding or
weaving and the resulting openings in between the wires?
This phenomenon can be studied in a qualitative way by
considering the canonical case of a periodic array of long
conductive wires with radius aparallel to each other and
with distance din between, as in Fig. 4. We know already
from Sec. IV A that wires only have an effect on an electric
ﬁeld parallel to them, so we will consider a plane wave com-
ing from a direction normal to the plane of the wires andwith an electric ﬁeld polarization parallel to the wires. It is
easy to understand that, due to symmetry, the same currents
are induced on all the wires. This means that the total ﬁeld
Fig. 3. (Color online) Loci of constant electric ﬁeld amplitude levels jEj, with Ebeing the phasor of the sinusoidally time varying electric ﬁeld. The perfectly
conducting wire is located in the origin. The direction of the incident plane wave with amplitude 1 is shown by the blue-grey arrow. The horizontal and v ertical
axes represent kxandky, respectively, k¼xﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃlep. The radius aof the wire was chosen as ka¼0.01. Calculations are performed based on an implementation
of Eqs. (12) and(13) inMATLAB (Ref. 13).
675 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Guy A. E. Vandenbosch 675 04 October 2023 23:16:02
can be written as a superposition of the plane wave and an
inﬁnite sum of cylindrical waves, one emanating from eachwire, spatially shifted over the proper number of d’s.
As long as a/C28d, based on the equations for the single
wire case, the total ﬁeld can be written as
E
total
zðx;yÞ¼Epw
zejky
þXþ1
n¼/C01C0cH2
0kﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðx/C0ndÞ2þy2q/C18/C19
:(14)
Ifdbecomes comparable to a, the current proﬁles on the
wires start to couple so strongly that the reasoning fol-lowed further is not valid any more. This case is mathemat-ically much more complex and beyond the scope of thispaper.
C
0cagain needs to be determined from the condition that
at the surface of the wires, the total zdirected electric ﬁeld
needs to be zero. Following the same projection techniquefor this zeroth order mode (i.e., integrating this conditionover the circumference of the central wire) yields
ð
2p
0Etotal
zðacosu;asinuÞdu
¼ð2p
0/C18
Epw
zejkasinu
þXþ1
n¼/C01C0cH2
0kﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðacosu/C0ndÞ2þðasinuÞ2q/C18/C19 /C19
du:
(15)
As long as a/C28d, for n6¼0 the terms under the square root
with the factor acan be neglected. For n¼0, we obtain the
same term as for the single wire. The result isC0c¼/C0ð2p
0Epw
zejkasinudu
2pH2
0ðkaÞþ2X1
n¼1H2
0ðkndÞ !
¼/C0Epw
zJ0ðkaÞ
H2
0ðkaÞþ2X1
n¼1H2
0ðkndÞ: (16)
The resulting total ﬁeld for different d=kis given in Fig.
5. It is seen that, as expected, the shielding gets better with
decreasing values of d=k. In the limit of very large separa-
tions compared to the wavelength (not shown in the ﬁg-ure), the situation is similar to the situation of light rays
passing through prison bars. The wave is not stopped at all.
From a shielding perspective, the most interesting is to seehow the shielding improves drastically below a certainthreshold for d=k. The distance for which a shielding of
/C06 d Bi sr e a c h e di sc a . d¼k=8. For d¼k=32, shielding
values of ca. /C030 dB are reached. This phenomenon is
directly related to the fact that for waves with certainwavelength, it is very difﬁcult to pass through openingsthat are much smaller than their wavelength. The result is a
“shielded wave” behind the screen with much smaller
amplitude and a standing wave with amplitude nearly twicethe incident amplitude in front of the screen. Note, how-ever, that this transmitted amplitude is multiple orders ofmagnitude larger than the one of a wave actually“penetrating” through the metal of a full metal screen, aswill be shown later in this work. Note further that in allc a s e sd e p i c t e di nF i g . 5, the distance between the wires is
much larger than the radius of the wires, so that most ofthe gridded 2D screen is actually ﬁlled with free space. It
is not needed to use a lot of metal for shielding purposes; it
is just needed to put the metal that is available closeenough together compared to the wavelength. Also, notethat the ﬁeld behind the screen very rapidly reaches theplane wave behavior again.
For wires with ﬁnite conductivity r, the reasoning has
to be generalized in the same way as for the single wire inSec. IV A . The outgoing cylindrical waves are generated
by currents Iinduced on the wires by the incident plane
wave (as indicated in Fig. 4). Due to symmetry, these cur-
rents are identical. The second boundary condition can be
obtained by imposing J¼rE
total
z in one of the wires.
Integrating this equation over the cross section of thisw i r el e a d st oa ne q u a t i o ni n I. This equation can be
solved, and the total ﬁeld distribution can then be calcu-lated. For a practical copper wire with a radius of 0.5 mmand at normal frequencies (tens of kHz–MHz), again, theshielding properties of the structure turn out to be quitesimilar.
Note that the conclusions drawn in this section for the
wire structure can be generalized to other geometries:
(1) other shapes, for example, strips,
(2) 2D (two dimensional) topologies, such as nets and
chicken wire, (the same phenomena occur, but now forboth polarizations of the electric ﬁeld).
Also note that the static version of this problem is consid-
ered in the Feynman Lectures on Physics .
14It can be veriﬁed
Fig. 4. (Color online) Plane wave hitting a periodic array of inﬁnitely long
conducting wires. The distance between two neighboring wires is d.Iis the
current induced in the wires.
676 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Guy A. E. Vandenbosch 676 04 October 2023 23:16:02
that in the limit for the frequency going to zero (14) leads to
an exponential decay behind the screen, as also found byFeynman. The mathematical proof is beyond the scope of
this paper.
C. Size of the shielded region for 2D shields
The canonical case considered is a plane wave hitting a
perfectly conducting half plane, as in Fig. 6. The direction of
incidence is normal to the half plane, and the polarization ofthe incident electric ﬁeld is either parallel or normal to the
edge of the half plane. This case is considered for tworeasons. The main reason is that this geometry shows how an
electromagnetic ﬁeld “diffracts” at the edge, in this way
reaching the region behind the shield. If properly applied, it
allows an assessment of how close behind a shield, a deviceor component has to be located in order to reach a certain
level of shielding. The second reason is the fact that this
geometry is a classic one, already solved quasi-analytically
by Sommerfeld in 1964 and very clearly described by van
Bladel.
15,16Because the mathematical derivation can be
found in these references, the resulting expressions for the
total ﬁeld are provided without proof. For an incident electric
ﬁeld parallel to the edge, this ﬁeld is
Fig. 5. (Color online) Loci of constant electric ﬁeld amplitude levels jEj, with Ebeing the phasor of the sinusoidally time varying electric ﬁeld. The perfectly
conducting wires are located periodically at y¼0 with spacings shown on each diagram. For the last case, behind the shield the ﬁeld is on the order of /C030 dB
(linear value ¼0.03). The horizontal and vertical axes represent kxandky, respectively. The radius aof the wires was chosen as ka¼0.01. Calculations are
performed based on an implementation of formulas (14)–(16) inMATLAB (Ref. 13).
677 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Guy A. E. Vandenbosch 677 04 October 2023 23:16:02
Etotal
z¼jsinðkrsinuÞ
þ1þj
2ejkrsinuFﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2kr
pr
cosu
2/C18/C19
þsinu
2/C18/C19 /C18/C19 !
/C01þj
2e/C0jkrsinuFﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2kr
pr
cosu
2/C18/C19
/C0sinu
2/C18/C19 /C18/C19 !
;
(17)
FðtÞ¼ðt
0e/C01=2jps2ds: (18)
Expression (18) deﬁnes the so-called Fresnel integral that
is used in expression (17), very well known in the diffraction
theory. The loci where the ratio of the amplitude of the totalelectric ﬁeld (i.e., incident ﬁeld þﬁeld generated by the cur-
rents induced on the shield) over the amplitude of the inci-dent ﬁeld (i.e., simply the plane wave amplitude) is constant
are given in Fig. 7. Of course, on the screen, the total (tan-
gential) ﬁeld is zero. It is seen in Fig. 7that the shielding is
better than 40 dB (a reduction in the ﬁeld by a factor of 100)only in a very small region behind the half plane. Close to
the edge of the half plane, this region is considerably thinner
than further away. A shielding of 20 dB (i.e., a reduction of
the ﬁeld by a factor 10) is reached in a considerable regionbehind the half plane.
Through this canonical case, two general shielding proper-
ties are illustrated. In a speciﬁc point behind a shieldingscreen, the level of shielding depends on the ratio between
the absolute distance from the screen and the absolute dis-
tance from the closest edge of the screen. However, it alsodepends on the electrical distance to the closest edge of the
screen, i.e., the distance expressed as a number of wave-
lengths. Keeping the absolute point behind the screen, the
same shielding will be better at higher frequencies, becausethis corresponds with moving further to the right in Fig. 7.
Based on Fig. 7, a good estimate of the level of shielding can
be made in each speciﬁc case.
In Fig. 7also note the formation of a standing wave pat-
tern at the right above the half plane. Going to the left of thehalf plane, i.e., where there is no shielding, the ﬁeld rapidlyapproaches the amplitude 1, i.e., the original plane wave is
just passing at the left of the half plane.
From a physical perspective, the fact that the ﬁelds reach
the zone at the back of the shield can also be explained byusing Huygens’ principle: Each point within a “primary”wave front can be interpreted as a new source of a
“secondary” spherical wave. The superposition of all these
secondary spherical waves completely determines the shapeof the forward propagating original wave at any subsequenttime. So in this case, the secondary spherical waves emanat-ing from the left half of the plane, i.e., where no shield is pre-
sent, do reach the zone at the back of the shield. The
amplitudes there are governed by the interference betweenall these secondary waves. Note that the ﬁeld levels that aregenerated by this effect in practice are quite comparable to
the levels observed when the shield is gridded or woven, of
course depending on the size of the openings expressed inwavelength.
For a half plane with ﬁnite conductivity r, a contribution
to the total ﬁeld behind the screen generated by the wave
penetrating the shield has to be added. However, in Sec.
IV D , it will be shown that this contribution in typical
Fig. 6. (Color online) Plane wave hitting a conducting half plane.
Fig. 7. (Color online) Loci of constant electric ﬁeld amplitude levels jEj, with Ebeing the phasor of the sinusoidally time varying electric ﬁeld. The perfectly
conducting halfplane is depicted as a red line. The direction of the incident plane wave with amplitude 1 is marked in blue-grey. The horizontal and ver tical
axes represent kxandky, respectively. The levels /C040 dB (linear value ¼0.01) and /C020 dB (linear value ¼0.1) are indicated. Both the incident electric ﬁeld
polarization parallel to the edge (left) and normal to the edge (right) are considered. The white zone in the ﬁgures is the zone with shielding better th an 40 dB.
Calculations are performed based on an implementation of formulas (17) and(18) inMATLAB (Ref. 13).
678 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Guy A. E. Vandenbosch 678 04 October 2023 23:16:02
shielding situations is on the order of /C0100 dB, which means
that it is negligible in comparison with the contribution fromthe wave “going around the screen,” as described in thissection.
D. Penetration through a 2D shield with finite
conductivity
This phenomenon is the only one that can be well-
described by the classic textbook case of a plane wave hit-ting an inﬁnite conducting screen. Most of the wave reﬂects.A small part of the wave enters the screen, where it decaysin an exponential way while propagating further. This decayis governed by the skin depth of the metal of the screen. Atthe other end of the screen, a second reﬂection occurs andpart of the wave leaves the screen again. This means thatinside the screen, a situation with multiple reﬂections at the
interfaces at both sides of the screen may occur. The rigorous
analysis of this canonical case can be found in many text-books and will not be repeated here. The ﬁnal result for thetransmission Tof a normally incident plane wave can easily
be expressed in closed form,
3,4
T¼1
SE linearðÞ¼/C12/C12/C12/C124g0gse/C0csd
ðgsþg0Þ2/C0ðgs/C0g0Þ2e/C02csd/C12/C12/C12/C12;
(19)
c
i¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jxliðjxeiþriÞp
¼propagation constant in medium i; (20)
gi¼jxli
ci¼characteristic impedance of medium i;
(21)
where the subscript i¼0 represents the background medium
and the subscript i¼s represents the screen medium, which
is a conductor. A widespread misconception is the belief thata good shield needs to have a thickness much larger than theskin depth at the frequency considered. Working out expres-sion (19) for skin depths going to inﬁnity (or frequencies
going to zero) yields T’2=ðg
0rsdÞ. If the background
medium is air, then this further reduces to T¼2/(Z0rsd)
where Z0¼377Xis the impedance of free space. For a cop-
per plate of thickness 0.1 mm, this gives a shielding level ofca. 120 dB. This means that if one considers only this contri-bution to the ﬁeld behind the screen, this ﬁeld is reduced bya factor of 10
6.
In other words, in most practical circumstances, with ﬁnite
screens (see Sec. IV C ), or with woven screens or mesh
based screens (see Sec. IV B ), the level of shielding is not
determined by the penetration through the metal itself, but
mainly by the presence of any (even small!) holes in thescreen (as qualitatively described in Sec. IV B ), or by diffrac-
tion at the edges of the screen (as qualitatively described inSec. IV C ).
From a practical shielding point of view, a detailed study
of a plane wave hitting an inﬁnite conducting screen in mostcases is, thus, actually irrelevant. The exception is the so-called full-metal Faraday cage, i.e., a closed Faraday cagemade of 2D shielding material without holes/openings,where the penetration through the metal fully determines thelevel of shielding.V. MAGNETIC SHIELDING
The basic working mechanism of magnetic shielding is
different. The reason is that there is no magnetic equivalent
for the electric conductor; that is, a material with inﬁnite
magnetic conductivity that will respond in a way that the B-
ﬁeld inside is zero. The shielding of magnetic ﬁelds is a sec-ondary effect, related to the shielding of the electric ﬁelds inthe ﬁeld conﬁguration. It is qualitatively easily seen from the
differential form of Faraday’s law, i.e. (3), that in a region
where the electric ﬁeld is zero (or very small), the magneticﬁeld will also be zero (or very small), provided that the fre-quency is not zero (or large enough).
We can study this in a more systematic way. It follows
from (3)that inside a shield made of perfect electric conduc-
tor (thus, with conductivity r!1 ) for any frequency dif-
ferent from zero, the zero electric ﬁeld automatically leads toa zero magnetic ﬁeld. This is well known. The second stepinvolves relating the zero ﬁeld inside with the ﬁeld just out-
side, just as in the case of the electric ﬁeld. Applying (3)
again, but now just above the surface of the shield, and tak-ing into account that the tangential electric ﬁelds there arezero, we immediately see that just outside the shield themagnetic ﬁeld component normal to the shield is zero. It is
very important to emphasize that a shield (that essentially
consists of electric conductors) does not shield the magneticﬁeld components tangential to the shield in its immediateneighborhood. It just shields the normal component of this
magnetic ﬁeld. This means that there is a sudden jump of the
tangential magnetic ﬁeld at the surface of the shield fromzero (or a very small value) inside to a considerable valuejust outside. For sufﬁciently high frequencies, the study ofthe “shielded zone” is very similar to the case of electric
shielding and delivers results that are very similar. It is
important to note that an identical result is obtained by build-ing a line of reasoning fully based on eddy currents, as is tra-ditionally done.
However, for sufﬁciently low frequencies, the situation is
totally different. This is revealed by studying the relation
among ﬁnite conductivity, the frequency, and magneticshielding. A very educational way to do this is by studyingthe simple example of the magnetic ﬁeld inside a loop ofconducting wire, as in Fig. 8.
Applying the integral form of Faraday’s law, Eq. (1),
along the loop yields
RI¼/C0jx/
tot¼/C0jxðLIþ/incÞ; (22)
where /incis the incident magnetic ﬂux going through the
loop, which is directly related to the magnetic ﬁeld normal to
Fig. 8. (Color online) Loop with resistance R(due to the ﬁnite conductivity
of the wire) and inductance L(due to the inductive self-coupling) in the
presence of a time-varying applied magnetic ﬂux /inc(Ref. 17).
679 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Guy A. E. Vandenbosch 679 04 October 2023 23:16:02
the loop area, and Iis the current ﬂowing in the loop. This
can be solved as
I¼/C0jx/inc
RþjxL; (23)
/tot¼/incþLI¼1
ð1þjxL=RÞ/inc: (24)
The incident ﬂux, which is the integral over the loop area of
the magnetic ﬁeld normal to the loop, is, thus, reduced by a
factor that depends on ðxL=RÞ. Any device positioned
inside, or just in front or behind this loop, will experience
this reduction of magnetic ﬁeld and is, thus, shielded from
this magnetic ﬁeld component. For a perfect conductor, R
equals zero, and the magnetic shielding is perfect. The inci-
dent ﬂux is completely compensated. However, for any non-
zero R, there exists a critical frequency ðR=LÞ=ð2pÞbelow
which the shielding deteriorates to reach zero shielding at
DC, i.e., for x¼0. This is a major difference with electric
shielding.
This can be numerically illustrated by using the formulas
forRandLfor a copper loop of diameter Dand wire radius
a. These formulas can also be found in any basic textbook
R¼pD
rpa2¼D
ra2; (25)
L¼l0D
2ln4D
a/C18/C19
/C02/C18/C19
; (26)
yielding
xcrit¼R
L¼D
ra2
l0D
2ln4D
a/C18/C19
/C02/C18/C19
¼2
l0ra2ln4D
a/C18/C19
/C02/C18/C19 : (27)
ForD¼1 m and a¼1 mm, this delivers a critical frequency
offc/C25694 Hz. At 60 Hz, this yields a reduction of the
amplitude of the incident ﬂux by a factor 1.0037, which is
negligible.
Note that a full shield can always be seen as a superposi-
tion of an inﬁnite number of loops, each with its own current.
The effect is the same. For real-life conductors with ﬁnite
conductivity, magnetic shielding does not work for sufﬁ-
ciently low frequencies. This result is impossible to obtain
from the “plane wave understanding” of shielding.
The practical consequences are severe. Whereas from a
technical point of view, it is easy to shield houses from the
radiation generated within the context of wireless communi-
cation networks, it is almost impossible to shield houses
from the magnetic ﬁelds generated by the high-voltagepower distribution lines. The reason is that the frequency
there is only 50 or 60 Hz. These two forms of “radiation” are
highly controversial in the present day society, where a con-
siderable portion of the people is concerned with the radia-
tion exposure issue.
Note that it is possible to implement magnetic shielding
based on another operational principle. Shields can be madewith high-permeability alloys like mu-metal. This type of
shield works not by blocking or reﬂecting magnetic ﬁeldsbut by providing a preferred path for the magnetic ﬁeld lines
around a shielded area, a consequence of the high permeabil-
ity. This means that the best shape for this type of magneticshields is a closed container surrounding the shielded space.The electric analog is a container made of high permittivitymaterials, which essentially does the same thing for the elec-
tric ﬁeld. In the engineering community, this technique is tra-
ditionally not thought of as a real “shielding” technique, andit is very rarely used in practice. However, from a physicspoint of view, it is related. A high conductivity or a high per-mittivity then just means working with the imaginary part or
the real part of the complex permittivity. Both result in
shielding properties. A more detailed discussion on this isbeyond the scope of this paper.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the basics of electromagnetic shielding have
been reviewed. This is done from a physical point of view,
explaining the nature of the phenomena on the basis of rigor-ous mathematical formulations for very simple canonicalcases. The issue was considered from the perspective of howan incident wave can reach the zone at the back of a shield:
through the metal of the shield, through holes in the shield,
or via the edges of the shield. For most practical shields, theﬁrst route leads to negligible ﬁelds. The second and thirdroutes are the ones that need to be considered in real practi-cal cases. Depending on the situation and frequency consid-
ered, for appropriate shields they typically give reductions of
the ﬁeld levels in the order of a few tens of dB.
The questions asked in the introduction can now be
answered.
•There is indeed a difference in the behavior of a screen atlow and high frequencies. At low frequencies, electricshielding can be largely maintained, whereas magneticshielding properties largely get lost. At high frequencies,
however, electric and magnetic shielding become very
similar.
•Shielding does not only work for two-dimensional screensbut also for wire grids and, to a certain extent, even forsingle wires. The main difference is the level of shieldingand the region in space where the shielding is occurring.
•The traditional “educational” plane wave description of
shielding is typically used at high frequencies, and it is
valid for both types of shielding since they are inherentlylinked there. The description on the basis of eddy currentsis typically used for magnetic shielding at lower frequen-cies. However, in principle, the eddy currents and the cur-
rents ﬂowing in the screen of the plane wave description
are essentially the same electric currents. In the plane wavedescription, they are somehow “invisible,” since thisdescription typically works with reﬂection and transmissioncoefﬁcients without really considering the electric currents.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂicts of interest to declare. There is
no ﬁnancial interest to report. I certify that the submission isoriginal work.
680 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Guy A. E. Vandenbosch 680 04 October 2023 23:16:02
a)Electronic mail: guy.vandenbosch@kuleuven.be, ORCID: 0000-0002-
5878-3285.
1See<www.lessemf.com >for information on many practical forms of
shielding, here related to the controversy about electromagnetic ﬁelds inour society.
2H. Ott, Electromagnetic Compatibility Engineering (John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 2009).
3S. Celozzi, R. Araneo, and G. Lovat, Electromagnetic Shielding (John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 2008).
4K. L. Kaiser, Electromagnetic Shielding (CRC, Taylor & Francis Group,
Boca Raton, FL, 2006).
5S. Fahy, C. Kittel, and S. G. Louie, “Electromagnetic screening by met-
als,” Am. J. Phys. 56, 989–992 (1988).
6W. M. Saslow, “Maxwell’s theory of eddy currents in thin conducting
sheets, and applications to electromagnetic shielding and MAGLEV,” Am.
J. Phys. 60(8), 693–711 (1992).
7L. Kowalski, “About electrostatic shielding,” Phys. Teach. 27, 366–367
(1989).
8P. Rochon and N. Gauthier, “Strong shielding due to an electromagneti-
cally thin metal sheet,” Am. J. Phys. 58, 276–277 (1990).9Z. Geller and E. Bagno, “Does electrostatic shielding work both ways?,”
Phys. Teach. 32(1), 20–22 (1994).
10R. B. Schulz, V. C. Plantz, and D. R. Brush, “Shielding theory and
practice,” IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat. 30(3), 187–201 (1988).
11K. F. Casey, “Electromagnetic shielding behavior of wire-mesh screens,”
IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat. 30(3), 298–306 (1988).
12J. M. Aguirregabiria, A. Hernandez, and M. Rivas, “Shielding of an oscil-
lating electric ﬁeld by a hollow conductor,” Am. J. Phys. 64(8),
1008–1013 (1996).
13See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0087295 for “Matlab scripts.”
14R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton, and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on
Physics II: Commemorative Issue, Three Volume Set (Addison Wesley,
Boston, 1989), Sec. 5–7.
15A. Sommerfeld, Optics (Academic, New York, 1964).
16J. Van Bladel, Singular Electromagnetic Fields and Sources (Oxford
Science Publications, Clarendon, Oxford, 1991).
17G. A. E. Vandenbosch, “How to model connection wires in a circuit: From
physical vector ﬁelds to circuit scalar quantities,” Am. J. Phys. 81(9),
676–681 (2013).
681 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 9, September 2022 Guy A. E. Vandenbosch 681 04 October 2023 23:16:02
