
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| MAY 01 2023
The discovery of a supermassive black hole at the center of
the Milky W ay galaxy 
Bryanne McDonough ; Paul Withers
Am. J. Phys.  91, 386 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0086222
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
A Black Hole in Our Galactic Center
The Physics T eacher  (January 2008)
The Distribution of Black Holes in Galaxy Halos
AIP Conference Proceedings  (December 2009)
Formation of Supermassive Black Hole Binaries and Massive Seed SMBHs in Gas ‐ Rich Mergers
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2010) 04 October 2023 22:52:18
The discovery of a supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky
Way galaxy
Bryanne McDonougha)
Astronomy Department, Boston University, 725 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215
Paul Withersb)
Astronomy Department, Boston University, 725 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215
and Center for Space Physics, Boston University, 725 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215
(Received 23 January 2022; accepted 6 February 2023)
Black holes are fascinating astrophysical objects, yet they are rarely encountered in undergraduate-
level physics courses. Here, we use concepts accessible to upper division physics majors to explain
the discovery of a supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way galaxy, which was
recognized by the award of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics. Infrared observations of the innermostregion of the Milky Way galaxy show that many stars orbit around the galactic center at distances
comparable to the size of the solar system with decadal-scale periods. We show how, given the
sizes and periods of these stellar orbits, Newton’s version of Kepler’s third law can be used todetermine the mass and maximum radius of the concentration of mass at the galactic center. We
consider various possible physical interpretations consistent with this mass and maximum radius,
rejecting ﬂat disks due to dynamical instabilities, clouds of gas and/or dust due to gravitationalinstabilities, and clusters of compact objects due to collisional instabilities. This demonstrates that
a supermassive black hole is the only possible explanation for the observed orbits of stars close to
the galactic center.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0086222
I. INTRODUCTION
As objects whose gravity is strong enough to capture light
itself, black holes are fascinating to undergraduate students
in physics and astronomy. A Newtonian description of black
holes is accessible to students taking a ﬁrst college physics
course, yet students rarely encounter black holes again until
graduate-level physics courses that address general relativity
or upper-division astronomy courses that address galaxies
and active galactic nuclei. We postulate that introducingexamples featuring black holes when teaching other topics in
the physics curriculum will improve student engagement.
Here, we use concepts accessible to upper division physics
majors to explain the discovery of a supermassive black hole
at the center of the Milky Way galaxy. These concepts
include angular size, Doppler shift, uniform circular motion,Newton’s version of Kepler’s third law, kinetic, potential,
and thermal energy, Jeans instability, mean free path, and
gravitational focusing. This article is timely in light of the
award of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics for research related
to the discovery of a supermassive black hole at the center of
the Milky Way galaxy and in light of the release of the ﬁrst
direct image of that black hole in 2022.
In Sec. II, we introduce the development of scientiﬁc
understanding of the nature and astrophysical signiﬁcance of
black holes. In Sec. III, we discuss how the observable posi-
tion and motion of a star orbiting around the galactic center
can be analyzed to yield the period, size, and speed of the
star’s orbit. In Sec. IV, we describe the remarkable orbital
properties of stars close to the galactic center and contrast
them with the orbital properties of the planets that orbit the
Sun in order to illustrate that an immense concentration of
mass exists at the galactic center. We use Newton’s version
of Kepler’s third law, which relates orbital period and semi-
major axis to the mass of the central object, to quantify the
mass at the galactic center. In Sec. V, we examine a range ofpossible physical interpretations for what lies at the galactic
center and assess whether they are consistent with observa-tional constraints on its mass and radius. We consider two
end-member possibilities for the spatial distribution of this
matter: a ﬂat disk and a spherical cluster of material. Wealso consider the composition of this matter with possibilitiesspanning gas, dust, planets, stars, and the collapsed cores
of stars. In Sec. VA, we use Maxwell’s classic study of
Saturn’s rings to exclude the possibility of a ﬂat disk ofmaterial. In Sec. VB, we show that a cloud of gas and/or
dust is only able to resist gravitational collapse if it is much
hotter than observational limits allow. In Sec. VC, we con-
sider collision timescales for a cluster of discrete compact
objects. We show that frequent collisions rapidly destroy a
cluster of asteroids, planets, or main sequence stars at thegalactic center. In Sec. VD, we consider exotic compact
objects that are much denser than normal matter: white
dwarfs, neutron stars, and stellar-mass black holes. Here, weintroduce the concept of gravitational focusing to show that
frequent collisions rapidly destroy clusters of such objects at
the galactic center. In Sec. VE, we consider the conse-
quences of rejecting these possible physical interpretations.
In Sec. VI, we explain how the only remaining possible
physical interpretation, a supermassive black hole, satisﬁesthe observational and dynamical constraints.
II. BLACK HOLES
Gravity shapes the universe. It compresses planets and
stars into spheroidal shapes. It conﬁnes the hot cores of stars
at the immense pressures needed for nuclear fusion to occur,
which allows stars to shine. It pulls planets on ellipticalorbits around their parent star and does the same for stars
orbiting around the center of their galaxy. It draws galaxies
into the vast, web-like structure that ﬁlls the universe.
386 Am. J. Phys. 91(5), May 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 386 04 October 2023 22:52:18
Furthermore, gravity makes the strangest of all astrophysical
objects: black holes.
The ﬁrst imaginings of a black hole were independently
developed in the seventeenth century by scientists JohnMichell and Pierre-Simon Laplace based on the concept ofescape speed.
1Within the framework of Newton’s law of uni-
versal gravitation and laws of motion, matter is unable toescape the gravitational inﬂuence of an object of mass Mif its
speed Vis less thanﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2GM=Rp
,w h e r e Gis the gravitational
constant and Ris its distance from the object. That is, without
sufﬁcient speed, the matter is trapped close to the object.Michell and Laplace recognized that the escape speed of a suf-ﬁciently massive object could exceed the speed of light andhypothesized that, if light is affected by gravity, then no lightescapes from such objects, which hence appear dark.However, without any evidence that light is affected by gravity
or any evidence for the existence of such unusual astrophysical
objects, the concept of black holes languished for centuries.
This concept was reinvigorated in the early twentieth century
by Einstein’s theory of general relativity, which expanded onand superceded Newton’s law of universal gravitation. Einsteinpredicted that the propagation of light is naturally affected bygravitational ﬁelds, without the ad hoc considerations required
by Newtonian gravity. Furthermore, the predicted bending oflight rays due to gravity is twice as large in general relativitythan in Newtonian gravity.
2In 1919, observations of the posi-
tions of stars around the Sun during a solar eclipse vividly dem-onstrated the validity of general relativity.2,3These stars
appeared shifted from their nominal positions by precisely theamount predicted by general relativity, inconsistent with anyinterpretation based upon Newtonian gravity.
In 1916, Karl Schwarzschild theoretically explored the
extent of a black hole within the framework of general rela-tivity. He found the same basic result as was anticipated byMichell and Laplace: light cannot emanate from an object ofmass Mif that mass is conﬁned within a radius smaller than
R
S¼2GM=c2, where RSis known as the Schwarzschild
radius. For context, the Schwarzschild radii of the masses ofthe Sun and the Earth are 3 km and 1 mm, respectively. Thisillustrates that normal, familiar astrophysical objects areextremely far removed from the domain of black holes. In1939, shortly before assuming leadership of the ManhattanProject that developed the ﬁrst atomic bomb, RobertOppenheimer showed that an idealized spherical cloud ofmatter collapses inwards under its own weight to form ablack hole.
4However, their results did not imply that black
holes actually existed in the universe. Real astrophysicalobjects are not perfectly spherically symmetric and it wasthought that their asymmetries, however small, could prevent
matter from collapsing inwards without limit. Consequently,
black holes remained a theoretical novelty.
Several advances in the mid-twentieth century compelled
astronomers to re-consider whether black holes are potentiallyimportant astrophysical objects. First, in the 1950s and 1960s,the centers of many distant galaxies were discovered to emittremendous amounts of energy A single one of these “quasi-stellar radio sources” (quasars) could emit more energy thanall the light emitted by all the stars in the Milky Way galaxy.Rapid variations in quasar brightnesses on timescales of hoursto days required a remarkably small source of emission, com-parable in size to the solar system, and the implied power den-sities exceeded all expectations. It was soon hypothesized thata quasar could be powered by the accretion of material ontoan immense, or supermassive, black hole at the center of agalaxy. The radiated energy is emitted from infalling matter,
which is heated to high temperatures by friction and gravita-tional stresses. Although the black hole itself does not emitlight, its surrounding accretion disk will emit light at a rangeof wavelengths. In order to power a quasar, a black hole needsto have a mass on the order of 10
6–109times that of the Sun.
Second, in 1965, Roger Penrose overcame the restrictions ofspherical symmetry faced by Oppenheimer to show that col-lapsing matter forms a black hole regardless of asymmetries,rotation, or any other complications.
5,6Third, in 1967,
Jocelyn Bell and Antony Hewish discovered neutron stars,which are collapsed cores of large stars.7A neutron star typi-
cally has a mass of 1.4 solar masses (1 :4/C22/C21030kg) and a
radius of 10 km. Such a neutron star is only 2.5 times largerthan its Schwartzschild radius of 4 km, and its escape velocityof 2/C210
8ms/C01is over half the speed of light. In contrast,
stars and planets are around one million times larger than their
respective Schwartzschild radii. If neutron stars, objects thatare similar in size to their Schwartzschild radius, can form inthe universe, then the possibility that black holes, objectssmaller than their Schwartzschild radius, may also be able toform should not be rejected out of hand.
Yet direct observations of a supermassive black hole at the
center of a galaxy proved elusive for decades. Even though thecenter of our Milky Way galaxy does not host a quasar, initialobservations at radio wavelengths identiﬁed a very compactsource of intense emissions that was called Sagittarus A
*.8,9
Due to its compact size and location at the galactic center, the
radio source Sagittarus A*was suspected to be a relatively qui-
escent supermassive black hole. However, complementaryoptical observations proved challenging to obtain. They werethwarted by interstellar dust, which obscures our view towardsthe galactic center at visible wavelengths.
10
Nevertheless, the galactic center can be viewed at infrared
wavelengths, which are less affected by interstellar dust andwhich became accessible to astronomers with technologicaladvances in the late twentieth century.
10Such observations
present a remarkable picture of the innermost region of theMilky Way galaxy. Many stars orbit around the galactic cen-ter at distances of less than one light-year (e.g., Refs. 11and
12). Yet, at the focus of their orbits, where an immense con-
centration of mass must be present, the typical infrared bright-ness is fainter than that of the orbiting stars. In order todeﬁnitively conclude that a supermassive black hole lies atthe center of the Milky Way galaxy, astronomers had to deter-mine how much mass was present, determine the size of theregion occupied by this mass, and demonstrate that only onepossible physical interpretation, a supermassive black hole,could conceivably be consistent with these observations.
This challenge was met by Reinhard Genzel of the Max
Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Germany, andAndrea Ghez of the University of California Los Angeles,United States, who acquired exquisitely precise observationsof stars orbiting around the galactic center and analyzedthem to rule out other possible physical interpretations ofconditions at the galactic center.
The efforts of astronomers to show that black holes exist
and that they play a major role in the universe were recog-nized by the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics.
13One half was
awarded to Roger Penrose “for the discovery that black holeformation is a robust prediction of the general theory of rela-tivity”
6and the other half was shared by Reinhard Genzel
and Andrea Ghez “for the discovery of a supermassive com-pact object at the centre of our galaxy.”10
387 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 B. McDonough and P. Withers 387 04 October 2023 22:52:18
In the remainder of this article, we present a heuristic out-
line of the Nobel-winning work of Genzel and Ghez. A com-prehensive description is available elsewhere.
14Further
information is available on the websites of Genzel15and
Ghez.16Also, a thorough narrative at an advanced scientiﬁc
level was released by the Nobel Prize Committee.17
III. OBSERVABLE PROPERTIES OF THE ORBITS
OF STARS NEAR THE GALACTIC CENTER
Newton’s version of Kepler’s third law can be used to
determine the mass concentrated at the galactic center (GC)from the period Pand semi-major axis aof an orbiting star.
In principle, the orbital period Pcan be found from time
series observations of the periodic behavior of the position orvelocity of an orbiting star. Stellar positions are measuredusing astrometry, which involves precise determination oftheir positions on the plane of the sky. This provides only twoof the three components of their true vector positions. Thethird component, which is parallel to the line of sight fromEarth, is not directly measured. However, the component ofvelocity in this direction, v
LOS, can be measured using spec-
troscopy, which involves precise determination of the wave-lengths of features in the spectrum of a star’s light. TheDoppler shift ( Dk) in the wavelength ( k) of a line in the stellar
spectrum is related to v
LOS according to Dk=k¼vLOS=c,
where cis the speed of light. The other two components of
velocity are not directly measured.
As outlined below, direct measurements of time series of
these two components of position and this one component ofvelocity can be analyzed to determine the three dimensionalposition and velocity of the orbiting star, as well as the dis-tance from Earth to the galactic center.
We wish to understand how these observable properties are
related to the period, semi-major axis, and speed of an orbit.As those relationships are complex for the realistic scenarioof an elliptical orbit at an unknown inclination, we use a
series of simpler idealized scenarios involving circular orbits
in order to introduce the relevant concepts. These scenariosassume a central mass of 4 :5/C210
6solar masses, consistent
with the ﬁndings of Genzel and Ghez, an orbital radius of1:76/C210
13m, equal to the periapsis (closest approach) dis-
tance of the noteworthy star S2, and a distance from Earth of8.4 kiloparsecs (2 :6/C210
20m).12Spectroscopic observations
are assumed to occur at 2 lm, a representative wavelength in
the near-infrared range observed by Genzel and Ghez.12
First, consider the idealized scenario in which a star near
the galactic center has a circular orbit whose orbital plane isface-on as viewed from Earth. As illustrated in the top leftpanel of Fig. 1, the star appears to move around in a circular
pattern. The physical radius of the orbit, the semi-major axisa, is required in Newton’s version of Kepler’s third law.
However, it is not directly observable. Instead, the relevantobservable quantity is the angular radius a, which is the
apparent angular size of the orbit. These quantities arerelated by a¼ad, where dis the distance to the galactic cen-
ter. As illustrated in the top middle panel of Fig. 1, astrome-
tric observations of the star can determine the period Pand
the angular size aof its orbit, but not the physical radius
(semi-major axis a) or speed vof its orbit. Furthermore, as
illustrated in the top right panel of Fig. 1, the star does not
exhibit any Doppler shift as its line-of-sight velocity compo-nent v
LOSis always zero. In this scenario, spectroscopicobservations provide no useful information. The star’s
orbital properties are not completely determined.
Second, consider the complementary scenario in which a
star near the galactic center has a circular orbit whose orbital
plane is edge-on as viewed from Earth. As illustrated in themiddle left panel of Fig. 1, the star appears to move back and
forth in a straight line. As illustrated in the central panel of
Fig.1and as in the ﬁrst idealized scenario, astrometric obser-
vations of the star can determine the period Pand the angular
sizeaof the radius of its orbit, but not the physical extent of
its radius (semi-major axis a)o rs p e e d vof its orbit. In this
scenario, however, the star’s Doppler shift varies sinusoidally
with time, as illustrated in the middle right panel of Fig. 1.
Spectroscopic observations of the star can yield the orbitalspeed vviaDk
max=k¼v=c, where Dkmaxis the amplitude of
the observed sinusoidal Doppler shift. Furthermore, the physi-
cal size of the orbit ( a) follows from v¼2pa=P, and the dis-
tance to the galactic center ( d) follows from a¼ad.
Third, consider a more general scenario in which a star near the
galactic center has a circular orbit whose orbital plane is inclined
at some angle has viewed from Earth. We adopt h¼45/C14when
depicting this scenario in Fig. 1. As illustrated in the bottom left
panel of Fig. 1, the star appears to move around in an elliptical
pattern with a projected semi-major axis of angular size aand a
projected semi-minor axis of angular size b. As illustrated in the
bottom middle panel of Fig. 1, astrometric observations of the star
can determine the period Pand the angular sizes aandbof its
orbit, but not the physical radius (semi-major axis a)o rs p e e d vof
its orbit. However, as we have assumed that the orbit is circular,
the inclination angle hcan be found as the ratio b=aequals cos h.
In this scenario, the star’s Doppler shift also varies sinusoidally
with time, as illustrated in the bottom right panel of Fig. 1.N o t e
that the magnitude of the Doppler shift is less than in the secondidealized scenario even though the star’s actual orbital speed is
unchanged. Spectroscopic observations of the star can yield the
maximum line-of-sight speed v
LOS;maxviaDkmax=k¼vLOS;max=c.
However, this quantity is not the orbital speed v.I n s t e a d ,
vLOS;max¼vsinh. Hence, the combination of the astrometric
determination of hand the spectroscopic determination of vLOS;max
can provide the desired orbital speed v. As before, the physical
size of the orbit ( a) follows from v¼2pa=P, and the distance to
the galactic center ( d) follows from a¼ad.
More mathematically sophisticated versions of these basic
concepts can be applied to elliptical orbits around the galactic
center such that orbital period P, angular extent aof semi-
major axis, physical size aof semi-major axis, average speed
v,a n dd i s t a n c e dto galactic center can be determined from
astrometric and spectroscopic observations of an orbiting star.
The orbital eccentricity, tilt of the orbital plane, and orientationof the semi-major axis can also be determined. The periodic
time series of angular positions and Doppler shifts that are
shown in Fig. 1were developed for idealized circular orbits
but are representative of the actual values and periods observed
for elliptical orbits of stars around the galactic center.
IV. OBSERVED PROPERTIES OF STARS NEAR THE
GALACTIC CENTER AND IMPLICATIONS FOR
THE CONCENTRATION OF MASS AT THE
GALACTIC CENTER
Figure 2shows a representative infrared image of stars
orbiting the galactic center. Repeated imaging over several
decades has mapped out the orbits of dozens of these stars.
388 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 B. McDonough and P. Withers 388 04 October 2023 22:52:18
One of the brightest stars, known as S2 by Genzel’s group
and S0–2 by Ghez’s group, has been observed to complete a
full orbit around the galactic center (Fig. 3). Its periapsis dis-
tance of 1 :76/C21013m is about 118 astronomical units (AU)
or about four times the orbital distance of Neptune from the
Sun, and its semi-major axis of 1 :56/C21014m is about
1045 AU or about 35 times the orbital distance of Neptune,
yet its orbital period is 16 years or about one-tenth that of
Neptune.12Clearly, the mass at the center of our galaxy is
much greater than the mass of the Sun. Analysis of astrome-
tric and spectroscopic observations of the star S2/S0-2 has
determined that the galactic center is 8.4 kiloparsecs
(2:6/C21020m) from our Sun.12The orbital and physical
properties of many other stars orbiting around the galactic
center have also been measured.18
If the 16 year period and 1045 AU semi-major axis of the
star S2/S0-2 are used with Newton’s version of Kepler’s
third law, then the inferred central mass is 4 :6/C2106solar
masses. More reﬁned analysis incorporating the orbits of
many stars yields ð4:560:4Þ/C2106solar masses.12Although
this is several million times the mass of the Sun, it is stillsmall in comparison to the total mass of the Milky Way
galaxy, which is on the order of 1012solar masses. The small-
est known periapsis distance of a star orbiting the galactic
center is approximately 13 AU,19an order of magnitude
smaller than that of star S2/S0-2. This sets an upper limit forthe physical size of the concentration of mass at the galactic
center, R
GC.
Furthermore, the weakness of infrared emission from the
galactic center places an upper limit on the luminosity of theconcentration of mass present there.
20
Whatever lies at the center of our galaxy must satisfy
these limits on its mass, radius, and luminosity.
V. POSSIBLE PHYSICAL INTERPRETATIONS
There are many possibilities for what lies at the center of
our galaxy.
There are two end-member possibilities for the spatial dis-
tribution of this matter: a ﬂat disk (conceptually similar to
Saturn’s rings) and a spherical cluster (conceptually similar
to the Oort cloud).
Fig. 1. (Top row) Synthetic astrometric and spectroscopic observations of face-on circular orbit for the ﬁrst idealized scenario of Sec. III. From left to right,
position on the plane of the sky, time series of x (solid line) and y (dashed line) components of position, where the x direction is parallel to the projec ted semi-
major axis of the orbit, and time series of Doppler shift at 2 lm. (Middle row) As top row, but for edge-on circular orbit in the second idealized scenario of
Sec. III. (Bottom row) As top row, but for circular orbit inclined at 45/C14in the third idealized scenario of Sec. III.
389 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 B. McDonough and P. Withers 389 04 October 2023 22:52:18
There are numerous possibilities for the composition of
this matter. It could be composed of gas, dust, or what areknown as compact objects. There are many candidate types
of compact objects that have been directly observed else-
where in our galaxy, including pebbles, asteroids, moons,various types of planets, brown dwarfs, various types ofstars, as well as more exotic compact objects like white
dwarfs, neutron stars, and stellar-mass black holes.
In order to be a viable explanation for the concentration of
mass at the galactic center, a possible physical interpretationmust satisfy the constraints listed in Sec. IV. If a ﬂat disk, it
must also be dynamically stable. If a cluster of gas, dust, or
compact objects, it must also be stable against gravitational
collapse over a suitable timescale. That is, it should not rap-idly collapse inwards under its own weight. If a cluster ofcompact objects, it must also be stable against disruption by
collisions over a suitable timescale. That is, compact objects
should not frequently crash into their neighbors, whichdestroys them.
We assess these possible physical interpretations in
Secs. VA – VD .
A. Flat disk
The combination of astrometry and spectroscopy out-
l i n e di nS e c . IIIcan determine the orientations of orbits of
stars around the galactic center. These orbital planes are
randomly oriented,
18which argues against the concentra-
tion of mass at the galactic center being distributed in a ﬂatdisk.
Fig. 2. (Color online) The background shows a 1 arc sec /C21 arc sec false
color infrared image of stars near the galactic center. The foreground shows
the orbits of selected stars, including star S2/S0-2. The annual average posi-
tions of these stars are shown by colored dots in which the color saturation
increases with time. For each star, the dot with the greatest color saturation
coincides with its position in the background image. “This image was cre-
ated by Professor Andrea Ghez and her research team at UCLA and is from
datasets obtained with the W. M. Keck Telescopes.” This image is fromhttps://galacticcenter.astro.ucla.edu/plot_central_image_2020_hires.png and
is used with the permission of the UCLA Galactic Center Group.
Fig. 3. (Color online) Astrometric and spectroscopic observations of the star S2/S0-2 over a full orbital period. The left panel shows the position of this star rel-
ative to the compact radio source Sagittarus A* (Sgr A*), which is interpreted to be colocated with the supermassive black hole. The top right panel sho ws the
line-of-sight radial velocity of this star over two decades. The bottom right panel highlights the position of the star near its May 2018 periapsis. Re produced
from Fig. 2 of Ref. 26with permission.
390 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 B. McDonough and P. Withers 390 04 October 2023 22:52:18
Further evidence against the ﬂat disk scenario is provided
by analogy with Saturn’s rings. If the concentration of mass
at the galactic center is a collection of discrete compact
objects (e.g., pebbles) each of mass MO, then the number of
compact objects NOequals MGC=MO. Given a disk radius
RGCand a number NOof compact objects, the separation
between nearest neighbors is RGC=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃNOp. The outermost edge
of the ﬂat disk, which has circumference 2 pRGC, is, there-
fore, equivalent to a ring of 2 pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃNOpobjects. The stability of
such a ring was assessed by James Clerk Maxwell in a
famous study of Saturn’s rings for which he received theUniversity of Cambridge’s Adams Prize in 1857.
Maxwell found that a ring of N
ringparticles, each of mass
mring, orbiting around a central mass Mcentral is unstable if
mring=Mcentral >2:3=N3
ring.21,22Hence, a ﬂat disk of compact
objects around the galactic center will be unstable if
MO=MGC>2:3=ð2pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃNOpÞ3.A s NO¼MGC=MO, this implies
that a ﬂat disk will be unstable if ðMGC=MOÞ1=2>2:3=ð2pÞ3
orðMGC=MOÞ>0:1. As the total mass of a collection of
compact objects ( MGC) must exceed the mass of one such
compact object ( MO), we exclude the possibility that the con-
centration of mass at galactic center is a ﬂat disk of compact
objects. These considerations also exclude the possibility ofa ﬂat disk of gas and/or dust.
This result has broader implications. In order to be stable,
an astrophysical ﬂat disk must contain an appreciable central
concentration of mass. For example, Saturn’s rings containSaturn at their center, a protoplanetary disk contains a proto-
star at its center, and a spiral galaxy contains a central bulge.
If we reﬁne the idealized “ﬂat disk” scenario for the galac-
tic center to consider the scenario of a ﬂat disk with a centralconcentration of mass, then the central concentration of massmust have mass, radius, and luminosity consistent with obser-
vations and must be dynamically stable. This scenario is
encompassed by those considered below in Secs. VB – VD .
B. Cloud of gas and/or dust
Large clouds of gas and/or dust with masses of 10
5–106
solar masses have been observed across the galaxy (e.g., Ref.
23). As gravity is a universally attractive force, if all the par-
ticles in a cloud of gas and/or dust are stationary, then thecloud will collapse inwards under its own weight. In order for
the cloud to avoid this fate, the particles must be moving. The
stability of the cloud against gravitational collapse can beassessed using the concept of Jeans instability.
24The total
gravitational potential energy of a putative cloud at the galac-
tic center is on the order of /C0GM2
GC=RGC. Similarly, the total
kinetic energy of the cloud is on the order of 0 :5MGCv2
thermal ,
where vthermal is the average speed of particles in the cloud.
The particle speed vthermal is related to the temperature Tvia
kT/C240:5mparticle v2
thermal ,w h e r e kis Boltzmann’s constant and
mparticle is the mass of an individual particle.
If the total energy of the cloud, which is the sum of these two
components, is negative, then it will collapse under its own
weight. After some manipulation, we ﬁnd that the cloud is unsta-ble against gravitational collapse if R
GC<GM GCmparticle =kT.
Equivalently, a cloud of mass MGCand radius RGCwill collapse
if its temperature satisﬁes kT<GM GCmparticle =RGC. Adopting
the value of MGCand the upper limit on RGCstated in Sec. IV
for a cloud composed of hydrogen atoms shows that the cloud
will collapse unless its temperature exceeds 4 /C21010K. Even
greater values are obtained for this critical temperature ifindividual particles are more massive than a hydrogen atom or
the cloud radius is smaller than the upper limit for RGCstated in
Sec. IV. At such high temperatures, dust particles vaporize into
their constituent atoms, so the putative cloud of gas and/or dustis a dust-free cloud of ionized gas.
Such a high temperature stretches the bounds of plausibil-
ity. It is several orders of magnitude greater than the hottest
astrophysical environments. This temperature corresponds toa characteristic photon energy ( kT)o f5 /C210
/C013Jo r3 M e V
and a characteristic wavelength ( kT¼hc=k)o f4/C210/C013m,
well into the gamma ray region of the electromagnetic spec-trum. Yet no signatures of emissions from a hot (4 /C210
10
K), massive (4 :5/C2106solar masses) cloud of ionized gas at
the galactic center have been observed, either directly orindirectly via their effects on the surrounding environment.
We must also exclude the possibility that the cloud of gas
and/or dust is relatively cold and hence unstable against
gravitational collapse but collapses so slowly that it is effec-tively stable over the age of the universe (14 /C210
9years).
Strictly speaking, we should assess stability relative to theslightly younger age of our galaxy, but the slight differencein these ages is immaterial for the present purpose. If gravita-tional collapse occurs, then the timescale on which it willhappen is on the order of the size of the cloud divided by thespeed of a particle moving under the inﬂuence of the gravita-
tional attraction of the cloud. The relevant speed can be esti-
mated by comparing the dynamical acceleration of an
orbiting particle ( v
2
dynamical =RGC) to its gravitational accelera-
tion ( GM GC=R2
GC), which yields vdynamical /C24ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
GM GC=RGCp
.
Hence, the collapse timescale is on the order ofﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R3
GC=GM GCq
. Adopting the value of MGCand the upper
limit on RGCstated in Sec. IVyields a collapse timescale of
105years. If the actual value of RGCis smaller than the
observed upper limit, then the collapse timescale is evensmaller. As this collapse timescale is much shorter than theage of the universe, a cold, gravitationally unstable cloud ofgas and/or dust can be rejected.
Furthermore, if the concentration of mass at the galactic
center is a cloud of gas and/or dust, then it must be extremelydifferent from any other known cloud of gas and/or dust.
Giant molecular clouds with masses comparable to M
GC
have been observed, but clouds of such masses typically
have a radius on the order of 100 parsecs,23which is six
orders of magnitude larger than RGC.
If the concentration of mass at the galactic center was a
cloud of gas and/or dust, then it is unstable against rapidgravitational collapse unless its temperature is greater than4/C210
10K. Yet the intense emissions expected from such a
hot, massive cloud have not been detected. We conclude thatthe concentration of mass at the galactic center is not a cloud
of gas and/or dust.
C. A cluster of compact objects
If the concentration of mass at the galactic center is a clus-
ter of discrete compact objects each of mass M
O, then the
number of compact objects NOequals MGC=MO.
In this scenario, the Jeans instability criterion outlined in
Sec. VBimplies that a cluster of compact objects with aver-
age speed vOwill be unstable against gravitational collapse
ifv2
O<GM GC=RGC. Furthermore, the collapse timescale ofﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
R3
GC=GM GCq
is the same as in Sec. VB,1 05years, which is
391 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 B. McDonough and P. Withers 391 04 October 2023 22:52:18
much shorter than the age of the universe. Consequently, in
order for a cluster of compact objects to be stable against rapid
gravitational collapse, their average speed vOmust be greater
thanﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
GM GC=RGCp
. This speed has implications for how fre-
quently members of a putative cluster of compact objects are
destroyed by collisions. If the timescale for a speciﬁc compact
object to experience a collision is much shorter than the age of
the universe, then the putative cluster of compact objects is
destroyed rapidly and cannot be considered a viable explana-
tion for the concentration of mass at the galactic center.
The frequency of collisions between these compact
objects depends on their speed vOand radius rO. If the
center-center distance between two of these compact objects
is 2rOor less, then a collision occurs. In that sense, the physi-
cal cross section rpof an object of radius rOispð2rOÞ2.
The mean free path Lof a speciﬁc compact object in this
cluster is L¼1=ðnOrpÞ, where nOis the number density of
these compact objects and rpis the collision cross section.
The interval between successive collisions for this speciﬁc
object, s, equals the ratio of this mean free path Lto the
object’s speed vO. Hence, s¼1=ðnOrpvOÞ.
This expression for scan be re-expressed as
s¼1
3MO
r2
O/C18/C19R3
GC
MGC/C18/C19
RGC
GM GC/C18/C191=2
; (1)
where we have made use of nO¼3NO=ð4pR3
GCÞ
¼3MGC=ð4pMOR3
GCÞ,rp¼4pr2
O, and vO¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
GM GC=RGCp
.
If the speed vOis greater than the lower limit of ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
GM GC=RGCp
, then the collapse timescale is shorter than
predicted in Eq. (1).
Table Ilists values of MO,rO, and sfor various examples
of what can be considered as normal astrophysical compact
objects (more formally, non-degenerate atomic matter, Sec.
VD): a pebble, asteroids 101955 Bennu and Lutetia, planets
Earth and Jupiter, and stars the Sun and Betelgeuse. These
collision timescales are less than one day, an insigniﬁcantfraction of the age of the universe, We conclude that the con-
centration of mass at the galactic center cannot be explained
by clusters of any of these types of objects.
We note that the predicted collision timescales listed in
Table Igenerally increase with increasing mass, with the
exception of the red giant star Betelgeuse, which has excep-
tionally low density relative to main sequence stars like the
Sun. This is because, with the exception of Betelgeuse, the
densities of these compact objects are comparable, even
though their masses span many orders of magnitude. If we
replace r
Oin Eq. (1)with density qO, which satisﬁes
MO¼4pqOr3
O=3, then we obtains¼1
34p
3/C18/C192=3
M1=3
Oq2=3
OR3
GC
MGC/C18/C19
RGC
GM GC/C18/C191=2
: (2)
Collision timescales impose a stringent challenge for
efforts to explain the concentration of mass at the galactic
center with a cluster of compact objects. This can be illus-
trated by a hypothetical limiting case. We consider a clusterof objects that all have density q
Oof 103kg m/C03, which is a
representative density for normal astrophysical compactobjects. According to Eq. (2), the collision timescale for
such objects is maximized when their mass M
Ois maxi-
mized. If we take the extreme limit of MO¼MGC, then the
implied collision timescale is still less than one year.
D. A cluster of exotic compact objects
Equation (2)indicates that the collision timescale may be
increased if clusters of denser compact objects are consid-ered. There are three main candidates: white dwarfs, neutronstars, and stellar-mass black holes.
Once nuclear fusion ceases in a star’s core, there is no lon-
ger a source of thermal pressure to support the star againstgravity and the core of the dead star collapses. If other sour-ces of pressure are eventually able to support the core’s
weight, then the collapsed core becomes a stable and very
dense object. If other sources of pressure are unable to sup-port the core’s weight, then the collapsed core becomes astellar-mass black hole. The only signiﬁcant source of pres-sure is degeneracy pressure, a quantum mechanical effectassociated with the Pauli exclusion principle in which sub-
atomic particles resist being compressed together. The end
state of the collapsed core—white dwarf, neutron star, orstellar-mass black hole—depends on the mass of the star.
As the core of a dead star collapses, the electrons that sur-
round its atomic nuclei are pressed together, which generateselectron degeneracy pressure. In a relatively low-mass star,electron degeneracy pressure is sufﬁcient to arrest the infallof the core. In this case, the collapsed core becomes a white
dwarf. White dwarfs typically have mass equal to that of the
Sun and radius equal to that of the Earth. If the concentrationof mass at the galactic center is a cluster of many such whitedwarfs, then Eq. (1)predicts a collision timescale of 24 yr.
In a relatively high-mass star, electron degeneracy pres-
sure is not sufﬁcient to arrest the infall of the core. As thecore collapse continues, it becomes energetically favorable
for electrons and protons to combine into neutrons. The core
becomes a giant atomic nucleus composed solely of neu-trons. These neutrons are pressed together, which generatesneutron degeneracy pressure. If this is sufﬁcient to arrest theinfall of the core, then the collapsed core becomes a neutronstar. Neutron stars typically have a mass around 1.4 solar
masses and a radius of just 10 km. If the concentration of
mass at the galactic center is a cluster of many such neutronstars, then Eq. (1)predicts a collision timescale of 14 /C210
6
years.
In a more massive star, neutron degeneracy pressure is not
sufﬁcient to arrest the infall of the core. As no further sour-ces of pressure are available, the core continues to collapseinwards without limit. This forms a stellar-mass black hole.
A representative value for the expected mass, M
BH,i s1 0
times the mass of the Sun. In order to apply Eq. (1)to a clus-
ter of stellar-mass black holes, a value for the correspondingradius is required. We adopt the Schwarzschild radius (Sec.Table I. Collision timescales for various compact objects. MOis the object
mass, rOis the object radius, and sis the collision timescale from Eq. (1).
Object rO(m) MO(kg) s(s)
A pebble 1/C210/C021:3/C210/C022:0/C210/C06
Bennu (asteroid) 5/C21027:3/C210104:6/C210/C03
Lutetia (asteroid) 5/C21041:7/C210181:1/C2101
Earth (planet) 6 :4/C21066:0/C210242:3/C2103
Jupiter (planet) 7 :1/C21071:9/C210275:9/C2103
Sun (main sequence star) 7 :0/C21082:0/C210306:4/C2104
Betelgeuse (red giant star) 5 :3/C210113:6/C210312:0/C2100
392 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 B. McDonough and P. Withers 392 04 October 2023 22:52:18
II), 2GM BH=c2, which is 30 km. In this case, Eq. (1)predicts
a collision timescale of 11 /C2106years.
When black holes collide, they merge. We consider
whether these mergers, which decrease the number ofblack holes but increase the mass of an individual blackhole, can result in a collisionally stable population.
Equation (1)shows that the collision timescale is propor-
tional to the ratio of object mass to the square of objectradius. As the Schwarzschild radius is proportional tomass, the collision timescale predicted for a cluster ofstellar-mass black holes is inversely proportional to blackhole mass. That is, collisions become more frequent asblack holes merge and grow, which does not yield a colli-sionally stable population.
Due to their collision timescale of decades, a cluster of
white dwarfs cannot explain the concentration of mass at thegalactic center. Equation (1)predicts that clusters of neutron
stars or stellar-mass black holes have collision timescales of
over ten million years. Although much less than the age of
the universe, this is long enough that these clusters of neu-tron stars or stellar-mass black holes should not be rejectedoutright. However, Eq. (1)neglects a factor that signiﬁcantly
shortens the actual collision timescales for superdense neu-tron stars and stellar-mass black holes.
The discussion of collisions set forth in Sec. VCneglects
the mutual gravitational attraction between two compactobjects of radius r
O. In that discussion, a collision occurred
if the center-center distance between two compact objects is2r
Oor less, giving rise to a physical cross section rpof
pð2rOÞ2. However, if the two compact objects approach to a
distance slightly greater than 2 rOat a slow relative speed,
then their gravitational attraction will ensure that a collisionoccurs. On the other hand, if they are moving with a fast rel-ative speed, then one will pass by the other without itsmotion being signiﬁcantly perturbed by their gravitationalattraction. This speed-dependent increase in the effectivecross section due to gravity is known as gravitational focus-ing. The effects of gravitational focusing are extremely sig-niﬁcant for a cluster of neutron stars or stellar-mass blackholes, each of which contains a mass comparable to that ofthe Sun within a radius orders of magnitude smaller. When
gravitational focusing is taken into consideration, the revised
cross section is known as the gravitational cross section, r
g.
It satisﬁes rg¼rpð1þv2
esc=v2
relÞ, where vescis the escape
speed from the physical surface of one of the compact
objects,ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2GM O=rOp
, and vrelis the relative speed between
the two objects.25The collision timescale is modiﬁed to
become s¼1=ðnOrgvOÞ.
The escape speed vescis ﬁxed by the physical properties of
the compact objects, but the relative speed vrelis not. The
effects of gravitational focusing are smallest when vrelis
greatest. If vrelis taken to be vO, a plausible upper limit, then
the ratio v2
esc=v2
relis greater than 100 for clusters of neutron
stars or stellar-mass black holes. Consequently, consider-ation of gravitational focusing will increase collision crosssections by at least two orders of magnitude. Hence, the col-lision timescales, which were initially found to be on the
order of 10
7years, should be decreased by at least two orders
of magnitude to <105years. These revised collision time-
scales are sufﬁciently small relative to the age of the uni-verse that clusters of neutron stars or stellar-mass blackholes cannot explain the concentration of mass at the galacticcenter.E. Assessment of possible physical interpretations
None of the scenarios set forth above offer a viable expla-
nation for the observed limits on the mass, radius, and lumi-
nosity of the concentration of mass at the galactic center.Flat disks are dynamically unstable. A cloud of gas and/ordust is unstable against rapid gravitational collapse unlessextremely hot, and the light emitted from such a large, hotcloud of gas is readily observable at the galactic center. Acluster of compact objects, such as pebbles, asteroids,
moons, various types of planets, brown dwarfs, and various
types of stars undergoing nuclear fusion is unstable againsteither rapid gravitational collapse or rapid destruction by col-lisions. Even a cluster of exotic compact objects, such aswhite dwarfs, neutron stars, and stellar-mass black holes,cannot provide a viable explanation.
VI. A SUPERMASSIVE COMPACT OBJECT
INTERPRETED TO BE A BLACK HOLE
The only remaining scenario that can satisfy the observa-
tional and dynamical constraints is that a different type of
astrophysical object exists at the galactic center. It must be
massive ( M
GC), so massive that the label “supermassive” is
appropriate, compact ( <RGC), and also extremely dim. Even
with the inferred mass of ð4:560:4Þ/C2106solar masses, its
Schwarzschild radius of 1 :3/C21010m is two orders of mag-
nitude smaller than the smallest observed stellar orbit.
This discovery was made by Genzel and Ghez, who
acquired and interpreted exquisitely precise astrometric and
spectroscopic observations of stars orbiting around the galac-
tic center with the help of their research groups. The argu-ments set forth in this paper are based upon thoseobservations and interpretations. Genzel and Ghez were sub-sequently awarded half of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics“for the discovery of a supermassive compact object at thecentre of our galaxy.” The phrasing of this citation reﬂects
the characteristic caution of the Nobel Prize Committee.
Fig. 4. (Color online) The black hole at the center of our galaxy viewed at
millimeter wavelengths. The bright feature is approximately 50 lm across.
This image is from https://eventhorizontelescope.org/blog/astronomers-
reveal-ﬁrst-image-black-hole-heart-our-galaxy and is used with the permis-
sion of the Event Horizon Telescope Collaboration.
393 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 B. McDonough and P. Withers 393 04 October 2023 22:52:18
Current understanding of physics offers only one viable
description of the nature of this “supermassive compactobject”: a black hole. A supermassive black hole at thegalactic center could satisfy the observational constraints onmass, radius, and luminosity. Being a single object, ratherthan a cluster of multiple objects, a supermassive black holealso obviates dynamical concerns regarding gravitational orcollisional instabilities.
This discovery was dramatically conﬁrmed in 2022 by
entirely independent observations that provided the ﬁrstdirect image of the supermassive black hole at the galacticcenter (Fig. 4). The Event Horizon Telescope (EHT)
Collaboration, an interferometric array of radio telescopesoperating with unprecedented sensitivity and angular resolu-tion at wavelengths /C241 mm, obtained this image that shows
a supermassive black hole at the center of our galaxy casting
a shadow upon its accretion disk.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the reviewers for helpful comments.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)Electronic mail: bnmcd@bu.edu, ORCID: 0000-0001-6928-4345.
b)ORCID: 0000-0003-3084-4581.
1Colin Montgomery, Wayne Orchiston, and Ian Whittingham Michell,
“Laplace and the origin of the black hole concept,” J. Astronom. Hist.
Heritage 12(2), 90–96 (2009).
2D. Kenneﬁck, “Testing relativity from the 1919 eclipse—A question of
bias,” Phys. Today 62(3), 37–43 (2009).
3F. W. Dyson, A. S. Eddington, and C. Davidson, “A determination of the
deﬂection of light by the sun’s gravitational ﬁeld, from observations made
at the total eclipse of May 29, 1919,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London Ser. A
220, 291–333 (1920).
4J. R. Oppenheimer and H. Snyder, “On continued gravitational contrac-
tion,” Phys. Rev. 56(5), 455–459 (1939).
5R. Penrose, “Gravitational collapse and space-time singularities,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 14(3), 57–59 (1965).
6H. M. Hill, “The theory of black hole formation shares the Nobel Prize in
Physics,” Phys. Today 73(12), 14–17 (2020).
7A. Hewish, S. J. Bell, J. D. H. Pilkington, P. F. Scott, and R. A. Collins,
“Observation of a rapidly pulsating radio source,” Nature 217(5130),
709–713 (1968).
8B. Balick and R. L. Brown, “Intense sub-arcsecond structure in the galac-
tic center,” Astrophys. J. 194, 265–270 (1974).
9Mark Morris and Eugene Serabyn, “The galactic center environment,”
Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 34, 645–702 (1996).
10R. Berkowitz, “Nobel Prize in Physics honors the discovery of a supermas-
sive compact object at the heart of the Milky Way,” Phys. Today 73(12),
17–20 (2020).
11R. Genzel, A. Eckart, T. Ott, and F. Eisenhauer, “On the nature of the dark
mass in the centre of the Milky Way,” Mon. Not. R. Astronom. Soc.
291(1), 219–234 (1997).12A. M. Ghez, S. Salim, N. N. Weinberg, J. R. Lu, T. Do, J. K. Dunn, K.
Matthews, M. R. Morris, S. Yelda, E. E. Becklin, T. Kremenek, M.
Milosavljevic, and J. Naiman, “Measuring distance and properties of theMilky Way’s central supermassive black hole with stellar orbits,”Astrophys. J. 689(2), 1044–1062 (2008).
13See <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2020/popular-informa-
tion/>for popular science background on the discovery of the supermas-
sive black hole.
14R. H. Sanders, Revealing the Heart of the Galaxy: The Milky Way and Its
Black Hole (Cambridge U. P., New York, 2014); available at https://
www.cambridge.org/9781107039186 .
15See <https://www.mpe.mpg.de/ir/GC/ >for the website of Ghez’s
research group.
16See <https://galacticcenter.astro.ucla.edu/ >for the website of Ghez’s
research group.
17See https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2020/advanced-informa-
tion/ for advanced information on the discovery of the supermassive black
hole.
18S. Gillessen, P. M. Plewa, F. Eisenhauer, R. Sari, I. Waisberg, M. Habibi,
O. Pfuhl, E. George, J. Dexter, S. von Fellenberg, T. Ott, and R. Genzel,
“An update on monitoring stellar orbits in the galactic center,” Astrophys.
J.837(1), 30–49 (2017).
19Florian Peißker, Andreas Eckart, Michal Zajac ˇek, Basel Ali, and Marzieh
Parsa, “S62 and S4711: Indications of a population of faint fast-movingstars inside the S2 Orbit—S4711 on a 7.6 yr Orbit around Sgr A
*,”
Astrophys. J. 899(1), 50–69 (2020).
20R. Sch €odel, M. R. Morris, K. Muzic, A. Alberdi, L. Meyer, A. Eckart, and
D. Y. Gezari, “The mean infrared emission of Sagittarius A*,”Astron.
Astrophys. 532, A83–A97 (2011).
21James Clerk Maxwell, On the Stability of the Motion of Saturn’s Rings
(Macmillan, London, 1859).
22Robert J. Vanderbei and Egemen Kolemen, “Linear stability of ring sys-
tems,” Astronom. J. 133(2), 656–664 (2007).
23Norman Murray, “Star formation efﬁciencies and lifetimes of giant
molecular clouds in the Milky Way,” Astrophys. J. 729(2), 133–147
(2011).
24J. H. Jeans, “The stability of a spherical nebula,” Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
London Ser. A 199, 1–53 (1902).
25I. de Pater and J. J. Lissauer, Planetary Sciences , 2nd ed. (Cambridge U.
P., New York, 2010).
26Gravity Collaboration, R. Abuter, A. Amorim, N. Anugu, M. Baub €ock, M.
Benisty, J. P. Berger, N. Blind, H. Bonnet, W. Brandner, A. Buron, C.
Collin, F. Chapron, Y. Cl /C19enet, V. Coud /C19e Du Foresto, P. T. de Zeeuw, C.
Deen, F. Delplancke-Str €obele, R. Dembet, J. Dexter, G. Duvert, A. Eckart,
F. Eisenhauer, G. Finger, N. M. F €orster Schreiber, P. F /C19edou, P. Garcia, R.
Garcia Lopez, F. Gao, E. Gendron, R. Genzel, S. Gillessen, P. Gordo, M.
Habibi, X. Haubois, M. Haug, F. Haußmann, Th. Henning, S. Hippler, M.
Horrobin, Z. Hubert, N. Hubin, A. Jimenez Rosales, L. Jochum, K. Jocou,
A. Kaufer, S. Kellner, S. Kendrew, P. Kervella, Y. Kok, M. Kulas, S.Lacour, V. Lapeyre `re, B. Lazareff, J. B. Le Bouquin, P. L /C19ena, M. Lippa,
R. Lenzen, A. M /C19erand, E. M €uler, U. Neumann, T. Ott, L. Palanca, T.
Paumard, L. Pasquini, K. Perraut, G. Perrin, O. Pfuhl, P. M. Plewa, S.
Rabien, A. Ram /C19ırez, J. Ramos, C. Rau, G. Rodr /C19ıguez-Coira, R. R. Rohloff,
G. Rousset, J. Sanchez-Bermudez, S. Scheithauer, M. Sch €oller, N.
Schuler, J. Spyromilio, O. Straub, C. Straubmeier, E. Sturm, L. J. Tacconi,
K. R. W. Tristram, F. Vincent, S. von Fellenberg, I. Wank, I. Waisberg, F.
Widmann, E. Wieprecht, M. Wiest, E. Wiezorrek, J. Woillez, S. Yazici, D.
Ziegler, and G. Zins, “Detection of the gravitational redshift in the orbit of
the star S2 near the Galactic centre massive black hole,” Astron.
Astrophys. 615, L15–L25 (2018).
394 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 B. McDonough and P. Withers 394 04 October 2023 22:52:18
