
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| MAY 01 2023
The one-dimensional potential energy function that is
analogous to a two-dimensional track 
Todd K. T imberlake ; Robert V alentin Mbenoun Mahend
Am. J. Phys.  91, 345 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0100950
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Theoretical characteristics of the bound states of M-X complexes ( M = Cu , Ag, and Au, and X = He , Ne,
and Ar)
J. Chem. Phys.  (December 2009)
Micromagnetic simulation of thermal ripple in thin films: “Roller-coaster” visualization
Journal of Applied Physics  (May 2003)
Is It More Thrilling to Ride at the Front or the Back of a Roller Coaster?
The Physics T eacher  (December 2007) 04 October 2023 22:51:54
The one-dimensional potential energy function that is analogous
to a two-dimensional track
Todd K. Timberlakea)and Robert Valentin Mbenoun Mahendb)
Department of Physics, Astronomy, and Geology, Berry College, Mount Berry, Georgia 30149-5004
(Received 27 May 2022; accepted 29 December 2022)
When learning about potential energy functions, students are sometimes told that the potential
energy function is analogous to that of a particle sliding along a frictionless roller coaster track orwire conﬁned to a vertical plane with peaks and valleys of the track corresponding to unstable and
stable equilibrium points. However, motion along a track with height z(x) is a constrained two-
dimensional motion, not a one-dimensional motion, so the exact nature of this analogy may beunclear. We show that the horizontal motion of a point mass sliding along a frictionless track z(x)
and subject to a uniform gravitational ﬁeld is equivalent to the motion of a particle in one
dimension characterized by an “analogous potential energy” function U
EðxÞ, which generally
depends on the total energy of the system (and thus on the initial conditions). We derive a general
expression for UEðxÞin terms of z(x) and the total energy and show that the equilibrium points of
the actual potential energy UðxÞ¼mgzðxÞare also static equilibrium points for UEðxÞwith the
same stability. However, UEðxÞmay have additional dynamic equilibrium points that are not
present for U(x). As an example, we derive UEðxÞfor a double well track and determine the period
of oscillations on that track. The results show that in general a single track corresponds tomany different analogous potential energy functions, each with a different value for the total
energy.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0100950
I. INTRODUCTION
In undergraduate mechanics courses, students learn how
to use the potential energy function U(x) to analyze the
motion of a particle subject to conservative forces. Thepotential energy function can be used to ﬁnd the force onthe particle, the particle’s speed as a function of position, theequilibrium points of the system and their stability, and eventhe period of oscillations around a stable equilibrium point.To help students understand the connection between thepotential energy function and the particle’s motion, instruc-tors and textbooks sometime make an analogy between thepotential energy of a particle moving in one dimension andthe potential energy of a particle sliding along a frictionlessroller coaster track or wire that is conﬁned to a vertical planeand has the same shape as the potential energy function.
1–4
In other words, students are taught to think of the motion ofa particle in one dimension in a system with a potentialenergy function U(x) as analogous to the motion of a particle
sliding along a frictionless track with height z(x) such that
UðxÞ¼mgzðxÞ.
How well, though, does this analogy hold? A particle
moving along the track z(x) is moving in both the x- and z-
directions, not just the x-direction, so clearly there is a differ-
ence. Because the particle is constrained to move on thetrack, it is possible to reduce the problem to an equation ofmotion that involves only xand its time derivatives.
However, the x-motion for the particle moving along the
track is notthe same as the motion of a particle moving in
1D with potential energy UðxÞ¼mgzðxÞ.
In this paper, we show that this motion is equivalent to 1D
motion subject to an analogous potential energy functionU
EðxÞ. This function generally includes the total energy ( E)
as a parameter, so, unlike a normal potential energy function,the analogous potential energy function (APEF) depends onthe initial conditions for the system. Thus, motion along thetrack z(x) is not equivalent to motion in 1D with potential
energy U(x) but rather is equivalent to motion with one of a
family of potential energy functions U
EðxÞparameterized by
total energy. Once the APEF has been found, it can be usedin the same ways that an ordinary potential energy functionis used, but only for a speciﬁc total energy. A change in thetotal energy leads to a change in the APEF also.
In Sec. II, we derive a general expression for the APEF,
and in Sec. III, we analyze the equilibrium points for the
APEF. We distinguish between static anddynamic equilib-
rium points and show that the equilibrium points of U(x) are
also static equilibrium points of U
EðxÞwith the same stabil-
ity, but that UEðxÞmay have additional dynamic equilibrium
points. In Sec. IV, we derive expressions for the period of
small oscillations about a stable equilibrium point as well asthe period of more general oscillations. In Sec. V, we apply
our results to the case of a particle sliding along a doublewell track. In Sec. VI, we summarize our results and discuss
how the APEF could be used for student projects.
Our paper accomplishes three goals. First, we clarify the
nature of the analogy between motion in one dimension gov-erned by a potential energy function and motion along a fric-tionless track with the same shape. Second, we provide anew tool, the APEF, for the analysis of motion along a fric-tionless track. Finally, we suggest ideas for undergraduatestudent projects in which students gather data on objectsmoving along (approximately) frictionless tracks and com-pare their data to theoretical results derived from the APEF.
II. ANALOGOUS POTENTIAL ENERGY FUNCTION
Consider a point mass moving under a uniform downward
gravitational ﬁeld of strength gon a frictionless track z(x),
where xis a horizontal coordinate and zis a vertical coordi-
nate measured upward. This system can be analyzed usingNewtonian mechanics,
5,6but here we take a Lagrangian
345 Am. J. Phys. 91(5), May 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 345 04 October 2023 22:51:54
approach. The potential energy for this system is
UðxÞ¼mgzðxÞ. The kinetic energy is
K¼1
2mv2¼1
2mð_x2þ_z2Þ¼1
2m_x21þz0ðxÞ/C2/C32/C16/C17
;(1)
where z0ðxÞ¼dz=dx, dots indicate time derivatives, and the
last step in Eq. (1)uses the fact that _z¼z0ðxÞ_x.
Using xas the generalized coordinate, the Lagrangian for
this system is
L¼1
2m1þz0ðxÞ/C2/C32/C16/C17
_x2/C0mgzðxÞ: (2)
Lagrange’s equation
d
dt@L
@_x¼@L
@x(3)
gives
m1þz0ðxÞ/C2/C32/C16/C17
€xþ2mz0ðxÞz00ðxÞ_x2
¼mz0ðxÞz00ðxÞ_x2/C0mgzðxÞ: (4)
Equation (4)can be solved for €xto ﬁnd
€x¼/C0z0ðxÞðgþz00ðxÞ_x2Þ
1þz0ðxÞ½/C1382: (5)
We see that the acceleration €xis generally velocity-
dependent, except for the case of a straight track for which
z0ðxÞis a constant. However, it is possible to use conserva-
tion of energy to solve for _x2in terms of xand thus remove
the velocity-dependence in the equation of motion. The totalmechanical energy of the particle is
E¼1
2m1þz0ðxÞ/C2/C32/C16/C17
_x2þmgzðxÞ: (6)
Letting zmax¼E=ðmgÞand solving Eq. (6)for _x2, we ﬁnd
_x2¼2gðzmax/C0zðxÞÞ
1þz0ðxÞ½/C1382: (7)
Combining Eqs. (7)and(5)gives
€x¼/C0gz0ðxÞ1þz0ðxÞ½/C1382þ2gz00ðxÞzmax/C0zðxÞ ½/C138/C16/C17
1þz0ðxÞ½/C1382/C16/C172
¼fEðxÞ; (8)
where fEðxÞdepends only on xand constants, including
zmax¼E=ðmgÞ. Because zmaxappears in the equation of
motion, it plays the role of a parameter, but it is important toremember that the value of z
maxis set by the initial condi-
tions that determine the total energy E.
Equation (8)can be solved analytically or numerically for
x(t), and once we have x(t), we can obtain z(t) by using our
track function z(x), provided that z(x) is single-valued and
differentiable. If our track has loops or other features thatmake z(x) multiple-valued, or if z
0ðxÞis undeﬁned, then we
must resort to a parametric approach in which we treat bothxandzas functions of a parameter uand then ﬁnd u(t).6In
this paper, we limit our analysis to smooth curves withoutloops so that the parametric approach is not necessary.
Rather than directly solving Eq. (8), we take a different
approach to analyzing the x-component of the motion along
the track. Note that Eq. (8)is exactly the same as the equa-
tion of motion for a particle moving along the x-axis and
subject to a force F¼/C0dU
E=dxderived from the following
analogous potential energy function:
UEðxÞ¼mgðzðxÞ/C0zmaxÞ
1þz0ðxÞ½/C1382: (9)
Thus, the horizontal motion of an object sliding along the
track z(x) is identical to the motion of a point mass with
potential energy UEðxÞ. Recall that UEðxÞdepends on zmax
and thus on the initial conditions, so the APEF differs from a
normal potential energy function. Normally, a particle atlocation xcan have an arbitrary speed, but since a particular
APEF only applies to a speciﬁc total energy, once we choosea location for the particle, then the speed of the particle is
automatically set by Eq. (7). However, once the initial condi-
tions are set, the motion of the particle along the x-axis can
be viewed as being related to the APEF in the usual way.
It is worth emphasizing that a given track z(x) generates
an entire family of APEFs. Thus, there is not a single poten-
tial energy function that is analogous to a given track, butrather there are an inﬁnite number of APEFs for a giventrack, with each function corresponding to a different valuefor the total energy or z
max. Exploring the motion of a point
mass along the track z(x) with different initial conditions is
equivalent to exploring a one-dimensional motion with avariety of potential energy functions, all with the generalform of Eq. (9)but with different values of z
max.
To understand the physical signiﬁcance of the APEF, we
need to consider the total energy of our system:
mgz max¼1
2m_x21þz0ðxÞ/C2/C32/C16/C17
þmgzðxÞ: (10)
Using Eq. (9), we can rewrite Eq. (10)as
1
2m_x2þUEðxÞ/C18/C19
1þz0ðxÞ/C2/C32/C16/C17
¼0: (11)
Dividing out the factor of ð1þ½z0ðxÞ/C1382Þ, we ﬁnd
1
2m_x2þUEðxÞ¼0: (12)
We see that our analogous one-dimensional system with
kinetic energy ð1=2Þm_x2and potential energy given by the
APEF does conserve energy, but that the total energy is
always zero . In other words, the analogous potential energy
is simply the negative of the portion of the particle’s kineticenergy that comes from motion in the x-direction.
If we replace U(x) with UðxÞ/C0mgz
maxso that the actual
total energy of the particle is E¼0, then the actual potential
energy is just the negative of the total kinetic energy. Fromthis analysis, we can see that the analogous potential energyis equivalent to the actual potential energy plus the portion
of the particle’s kinetic energy that is associated with its
motion in the z-direction. In other words, in creating the
APEF, we have taken part of the object’s kinetic energy,
346 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 T. K. Timberlake and R. V. Mbenoun Mahend 346 04 October 2023 22:51:54
used a constant of motion (total energy) to eliminate the
velocity-dependence of this term, and then added this result
to the actual potential energy. This process is very similar to
the way the effective potential energy is deﬁned for centralforce problems.
7
As noted above, the difference between the analogous
potential energy and the actual potential energy (shifted so
thatE¼0) is equal to the portion of the kinetic energy that is
associated with motion in the z-direction. Therefore, we
know that UEðxÞ¼UðxÞwhenever _z¼z0ðxÞ_x¼0. From
this result, we see that the analogous and actual potentialenergies must be equal at a local extremum of z(x) (when
z
0ðxÞ¼0) or at a turning point (when _x¼0).
Let us now consider the inverse problem of determining a
track z(x) that corresponds to a given UEðxÞ. If we could
solve this problem then we would, in principle, be able to
construct a track z(x) such that the x-motion of a particle slid-
ing without friction on the track would exactly mimic themotion in a system with some speciﬁed potential energy
function. Equation (9)shows that U
EðxÞdepends not only on
z(x) but also on z0ðxÞ, so the inverse problem of ﬁnding z(x)
given UEðxÞinvolves solving a nonlinear differential equa-
tion. This problem can be solved, but that only gives us a
track corresponding to our potential energy function for a
speciﬁc total energy . As noted above, a single track z(x) cor-
responds to an entire family of APEFs with different values
forzmax. In the same way, a given APEF does not correspond
to a single track but rather to an entire family of tracks withelevation function zðx;z
maxÞand different values for the
parameter zmax. A change in the total energy (or zmax) leads
to a change in the shape of the track. Thus, is it not generallypossible to construct a single track that corresponds to some
speciﬁed potential energy function. At best we would need
to construct many different tracks, with each track corre-sponding to the speciﬁed potential energy function with a
particular value of z
max.
III. EQUILIBRIUM POINTS AND STABILITY
The APEF introduced in Sec. IImight seem like nothing
more than a curiosity. However, it can be a useful tool foranalyzing properties of the motion along the track z(x). For
example, we can ﬁnd equilibrium points by ﬁnding values of
xsuch that dU
E=dx¼0. Using Eq. (9), we ﬁnd that
dUE
dx¼mgz0ðxÞ1þz0ðxÞ½/C1382þ2z00ðxÞzmax/C0zðxÞ ðÞ
1þz0ðxÞ½/C1382/C16/C1720
@1
A:
(13)
Note that the equilibrium points for the actual potential
energy U(x) are those points x¼x/C3for which z0ðx/C3Þ¼0. It
is clear from Eq. (13)that the equilibrium points for U(x) are
also equilibrium points for UEðxÞ. However, because UEðxÞ
depends on the total energy, we must distinguish between
static anddynamic equilibrium points. A static equilibrium
point is a point at which the acceleration and velocity of the
particle are both zero. Recall that the speed of the particle
must satisfy Eq. (7), so the particle can have zero velocity at
x¼x/C3only if zðx/C3Þ¼zmax. Inserting this condition into Eq.
(13), we ﬁnd that the condition for a static equilibrium point
x¼x/C3
sisdUE
dx/C12/C12/C12/C12
x¼x/C3s¼mgz0ðx/C3
sÞ
1þz0ðx/C3
xÞ/C2/C32¼0: (14)
Thus, the only static equilibrium points for UEðxÞare those
that are also equilibrium points for U(x) such that z0ðx/C3
sÞ¼0.
In addition to these static equilibrium points, UEðxÞcan
have dynamic equilibrium points x¼x/C3
dat which the accel-
eration of the particle is zero but the velocity is not zero
because zðx/C3
dÞ<zmax. The locations of the static equilibrium
points will serve as dynamic equilibrium points whenz
max6¼zðx/C3
sÞ, but there can be additional dynamic equilib-
rium points that satisfy
1þz0ðx/C3
dÞ/C2/C32þ2z00ðx/C3
dÞzmax/C0zðx/C3
dÞ/C0/C1¼0: (15)
These additional dynamic equilibrium points may not corre-
spond to any equilibrium point for the actual potential energyU(x). Note that usually all equilibrium points for a given
value of z
maxwill be dynamic equilibrium points, since an
equilibrium point x/C3is only static in the limit zmax!zðx/C3Þ.
It is instructive to examine the stability of the static equi-
librium points to determine how a particle placed at rest nearsuch a point will behave. For motion in a one-dimensional
potential, an equilibrium point is stable, leading to oscilla-
tions about the equilibrium points, if U
00ðx/C3Þ>0, and unsta-
ble, leading to motion away from the equilibrium point, ifU
00ðx/C3Þ<0. By taking the derivative of Eq. (13)and evaluat-
ing it at the static equilibrium points x¼x/C3
swhere
z0ðx/C3
sÞ¼0, we ﬁnd
d2UE
dx2/C12/C12/C12/C12
x¼x/C3s¼mgz00ðx/C3
sÞ1þ2z00ðx/C3
sÞzmax/C0zðx/C3
sÞ/C0/C1/C2/C3:(16)
Since we require zðx/C3
sÞ¼zmaxforx¼x/C3
sto be a static equi-
librium point, we ﬁnd that the right side of Eq. (16) reduces
tomgz00ðx/C3
sÞ, so the equilibrium point is stable if z00ðx/C3
sÞis
positive and unstable if it is negative. The stabilities of static
equilibrium points for the analogous potential are identical
to those of the actual potential: local minima of z(x) serve as
stable equilibrium points while local maxima of z(x) serve as
unstable equilibrium points. These results make sense
because near the local extrema the motion is almost entirely
horizontal and therefore the actual and analogous potentialenergies are approximately equal. Thus we see that the anal-ogy between motion on a two-dimensional track and motion
in a one-dimensional potential with the same shape is at least
qualitatively correct in that both situations give rise to thesame static equilibrium points with the same stability.
The stability analysis discussed above is derived from
doing a second-order Taylor series expansion of the potential
energy function about the equilibrium point. As such, it
applies only to small displacements that allow higher orderterms in the Taylor series to be neglected. We cannot applythis analysis to dynamic equilibrium points because if zðx
/C3
dÞ
is not approximately equal to zmaxthen the displacement of
the particle from the equilibrium point can be large and thehigher order terms in the Taylor series cannot be neglected.
IV. PERIOD OF OSCILLATIONS
Perhaps one of the most powerful uses of the APEF is to
ﬁnd the period of oscillations around a stable equilibrium
347 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 T. K. Timberlake and R. V. Mbenoun Mahend 347 04 October 2023 22:51:54
point. For a one-dimensional motion, the period of small
oscillations near a stable static equilibrium at x¼x/C3
sis
T0¼2pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃm
U00
Eðx/C3
sÞr
: (17)
Using Eq. (16), we ﬁnd that the period of small oscillations
near a local minimum of z(x)i s
T0¼2pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
gz00ðx/C3
sÞp : (18)
Note that this period is identical to the period that is obtained
from the one-dimensional motion with potential energyUðxÞ¼mgzðxÞ.
While the result in Eq. (18) applies only to small oscilla-
tions near a stable static equilibrium point, we can use the
APEF to ﬁnd the period of larger oscillations. Suppose thatthe point mass oscillates between x
minand xmaxsuch that
xmax>xminandzðxminÞ¼zðxmaxÞ¼zmax, we can solve Eq.
(12)for _xto ﬁnd
_x¼6ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
/C02
mUEðxÞr
: (19)
Using separation of variables8and integrating over half an
oscillation, we ﬁnd
ðT=2
0dt¼ðxmax
xmindxﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
/C02UEðxÞ=mp : (20)
Thus, the period of the oscillation is
T¼2ðxmax
xmindxﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
/C02UEðxÞ=mp : (21)
Although it may be impossible to evaluate the integral on the right
side of Eq. (21)analytically, it can be evaluated numerically.
V. EXAMPLE: THE DOUBLE WELL
To help clarify the relationship between a track and its APEFs,
we now examine the APEF for a double well track given by
zðxÞ¼d1
4x
d/C18/C194
/C01
2x
d/C18/C192"#
; (22)
where dis an arbitrary unit of distance. Thus, z0ðxÞ
¼ðx=dÞ3/C0x=dand the APEF is
UExðÞ¼mgdx
d/C18/C194
/C0xmax
d/C18/C194
/C02x
d/C18/C192
þ2xmax
d/C18/C192"#
41þx
d/C18/C193
/C0x
d !22
43
5;
(23)
where xmaxis the greatest solution of zðxmaxÞ¼zmax.
Figure 1shows the actual potential energy function for the
double well ( UðxÞ¼mgzðxÞ) as well as the APEF for two
different values of xmax. The plots are shown in terms of thedimensionless potential energy U=ðmgdÞand the dimension-
less coordinate x/d. In addition, all three functions are shifted
upward such that their minimum values (at x¼6d) are zero
to allow direct comparison between all three functions. TheAPEFs are shown only out to x¼6x
maxfor each case, since
the particle cannot move beyond these turning points.
As expected, the analogous potential energy matches the
actual potential energy at the three local extrema of z(x)
(x¼0;6d) as well as at the turning points ( x¼6xmax).
Otherwise, UEðxÞ>UðxÞsince the particle has some kinetic
energy associated with its motion in the z-direction.
Comparing the two plots shown in Fig. 1makes it clear that
the difference between UEðxÞand U(x) increases as xmax
increases.
Note that UEðxÞhas dynamic equilibrium points at the
three local extrema of z(x)(x¼0;6d) for both values of
xmax. However, for xmax¼2d,UEðxÞhas two additional
dynamic equilibrium points near x¼6d=2. As the particle
crosses these points, its acceleration €xchanges sign, but the
particle cannot be at rest at these locations. In addition, forx
max¼2dthe equilibrium point at x¼0 is a local minimum
forUEðxÞwhile it is a local maximum for U(x). As xmaxis
decreased to 1 :6d, the additional dynamic equilibrium points
disappear and x¼0 turns into a local maximum.9If we were
to further decrease the total energy such that xmax!ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
d,
then x¼0 becomes an unstable static equilibrium point. In
the limit as the total energy approaches zero, the points atx¼6dbecome stable static equilibrium points.
We have seen that changing the value of x
maxcan lead to
the appearance or disappearance of dynamic equilibriumpoints. Changing x
maxalso changes both the applicable
domain for the APEF and the shape of that function. Thus,when we increase the energy in this system the analogousone-dimensional motion is notsimply a motion with larger
amplitude and the same analogous potential energy function.Instead, it is a motion with larger amplitude and an entirely
Fig. 1. Actual and analogous potential energy functions for the motion of a
point mass on a double well track. The solid curve shows the actual potential
energy Uas a function of the displacement xfrom the central equilibrium
point, while the other curves show the analogous potential energy UEðxÞfor
two different values of the maximum displacement xmax. All quantities are
scaled to dimensionless values and the potential energies have been shifted
so that their minimum value is zero.
348 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 T. K. Timberlake and R. V. Mbenoun Mahend 348 04 October 2023 22:51:54
different APEF. This example emphasizes the fact that a
given track corresponds to many different APEFs, each witha different value of total energy.
Now we consider the period of oscillation for a particle
sliding along the double well track. This track gives rise totwo different types of oscillations: smaller ones near thepoints x¼6d(which become stable static equilibrium
points as z
max!zðdÞorxmax!d) or larger ones that pass
across x¼0 (which becomes an unstable static equilibrium
point as zmax!zð0Þorxmax!ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
d). To ﬁnd the approxi-
mate period for very small oscillations near x¼6d, we can
use Eq. (18)to ﬁnd
T0¼2pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d
2gs
: (24)
To ﬁnd the period of larger oscillations that are still conﬁned
to one side of the double well we must use Eq. (21)along with
the APEF given in Eq. (23). Note that zð0Þ¼z6ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
d/C0/C1
,s ot o
keep the particle conﬁned to the right side of the double wellwe must restrict our amplitudes to values such that
d/C20x
max/C20ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
d. For these cases, the particle oscillates
between xmin¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2d2/C0x2
maxp
andxmax. Using the dimension-
less coordinate y¼x=d, the period of oscillation is
T¼2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2d
gsðymax
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2/C0y2maxpﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þðy3/C0yÞ2
ðy4
max/C0y4Þ/C02ðy2
max/C0y2Þs
dy;(25)
where ymax¼xmax=d. The integral in Eq. (25) can be evalu-
ated numerically for any ymaxexcept ymax¼0, for which the
period is given by Eq. (24), and ymax¼ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
, for which the
period diverges because the particle approaches x¼0 asymp-
totically in time. The left side of the well is a mirror-imageof the right side, so Eq. (25) gives the correct period for
oscillations between /C0x
maxand/C0ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2d2/C0x2
maxp
.
The second type of oscillation spans both sides of the dou-
ble well with xmax>ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
d. The double well is symmetric
about x¼0, so xmin¼/C0xmaxand the period of oscillation is
T¼4ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2d
gsðymax
0ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þðy3/C0yÞ2
ðy4
max/C0y4Þ/C02ðy2
max/C0y2Þs
dy;(26)
where ymax¼xmax=d. This integral can be evaluated numeri-
cally for any ﬁnite ymax>ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
.
Figure 2shows a plot of the dimensionless period Tﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g=dp
as a function of the dimensionless amplitude of oscillation
xmax=dfor a particle sliding along this double well track. For
oscillations conﬁned to one side of the well, the period isgiven by Eq. (24) when x
max¼d. The period increases as
xmaxincreases until reaching the vertical asymptote at xmax
¼ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
dwhere the period is undeﬁned. For xmax>ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
d, the
period at ﬁrst decreases as xmaxincreases, but reaches a mini-
mum of somewhat less than 10ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
d=gp
near x¼1:7dand after
that increases indeﬁnitely as the amplitude increases. The localminimum in the period makes sense because the particle mustslow down as it passes across the local maximum of U(x)a t
x¼0. For total energies just above this local maximum value,
the oscillations will be very slow because the particle willnearly come to a stop at x¼0. As the energy is increased, the
particle will move across x¼0f a s t e r ,l e a d i n gt oas h o r t e r
period. For very large energies, however, the height of the localmaximum at x¼0 is negligible compared to the total energy
and the system will behave more like a quartic oscillator with aperiod that increases as amplitude increases.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have shown that the equations of motion, locations
and stabilities of equilibrium points, and periods of oscilla-tions for a particle sliding along a frictionless vertical track
can be found by using the analogous potential energy func-
tion (APEF) given in Eq. (9). We have applied these results
to the case of a particle sliding along a double well track, but
additional examples (inclined plane, inverted cycloid, and
parabolic tracks) are shown in the supplementary material.
10
In addition to helping students better understand the paral-
lels between motion on a track and the motion in a potential
well, the APEF could also be used as the basis for projects in
which students gather experimental data and compare to pre-dictions derived from the APEF. The experiments wouldrequire a track, wire, or surface on which an object (a cart,
bead, or rolling ball) moves within a vertical plane. One
would need to determine the function z(x) that characterizes
the track’s height vs horizontal displacement. A video cam-
era could be placed above the track, pointing downward, so
that a recording of the object’s motion would display onlythe horizontal motion. This video could be analyzed using a
program like Tracker
11and the resulting data could be com-
pared to results derived from the APEF. For example, thefunction x(t) derived from the video could be compared to
numerical calculations based on Eq. (8)with the total energy
determined from initial conditions, or the period of oscilla-
tions could be compared to the predictions of Eq. (21) once
x
minandxmaxare determined from the video data.
As a proof of concept, we have carried out an investiga-
tion of this kind using a parabolic track. The experiment
used a steel ball rolling back and forth inside a parabolic mir-ror. This situation created some complications with the anal-
ysis. Not only did we have to determine the elevation
function for the track, but we also had to modify the parame-ter values of that function to account for the fact that theFig. 2. Period Tas a function of amplitude xmaxfor a point mass moving on
a double well track. For xmax/C20ﬃﬃﬃ
2p
d, the particle is conﬁned to one side of
the well or the other. All quantities are scaled to dimensionless values.
349 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 T. K. Timberlake and R. V. Mbenoun Mahend 349 04 October 2023 22:51:54
system had a ball rolling without slipping rather than a point
mass sliding without friction. In addition, we could notcompletely avoid energy loss and sideways motion (in the y-
direction), although these problems proved to be minor. Inspite of these difﬁculties we were able to gather data onoscillations with different amplitudes and compare the peri-ods of those oscillations with the predictions of Eq. (21).W e
found excellent agreement between our predicted periodsand the periods determined from the video data. A detaileddescription of this work is provided in the supplementarymaterial.
10It is our hope that this paper can serve to
generate ideas for student projects along these lines. Themost difﬁcult part of such a project is constructing or pur-chasing a low-friction track (or a smooth surface for a rollingball) with a function z(x) that can be accurately
characterized.
The APEF can be extended in several ways. It could cer-
tainly be extended to a wide variety of different tracks. Inaddition, the APEF could be extended to 2D for the case ofmotion on an axially symmetric surface of rotation, a topicof some recent interest.
12–14
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly funded by the Berry College
LifeWorks Program. The authors would like to thank bothanonymous referees for their contributions to improving themanuscript.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts to disclose.a)Electronic mail: ttimberlake@berry.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-7974-6002.
b)ORCID: 0000-0003-3554-6364.
1Jerold Touger, Introductory Physics: Building Understanding (John Wiley
& Sons, New York, 2006), p. 159.
2John R. Taylor, Classical Mechanics (University Science Books,
Sausalito, CA, 2005), pp. 123–128.
3Patrick Hamill, Intermediate Dynamics (Jones and Bartlett, Sudbury, MA,
2010), pp. 183–187.
4Jerry B. Marion and Stephen T. Thornton, Classical Dynamics of Particles
and Systems (Harcourt, Fort Worth, TX, 1995), p. 84.
5Rainer M €uller, “Roller coasters without differential equations: A
Newtonian approach to constrained motion,” Eur. J. Phys. 31, 835–848
(2010).
6Thomas J. Bensky and Matthew J. Moelter, “Computational problems in
introductory physics: Lessons from a bead on a wire,” Am. J. Phys. 81,
165–172 (2013).
7See pp. 300–305 of Ref. 2 or pp. 321–326 of Ref. 3.
8William E. Boyce and Richard C. DiPrima, Elementary Differential
Equations and Boundary Value Problems (John Wiley & Sons, New York,
1986), pp. 37–38.
9In fact, it is not hard to show that the concavity of UEatx¼0 is negative
forxmax<ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þﬃﬃﬃ
3pp
and positive for xmax>ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1þﬃﬃﬃ
3pp
.
10See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/10.111
9/5.0100950 for analyses of the analogous potential energy function and
periods of oscillation for additional track shapes (inclined plane, inverted
cycloid, and parabola) as well as as a comparison of the theoretical predic-
tions for a parabolic track to experimental data for a steel ball rolling in a
parabolic mirror.
11Douglas Brown, Wolfgang Christian, and Robert M. Hanson, see <https://
physlets.org/tracker/ >for “Tracker Video Analysis and Modeling
Tool.”
12L. Q. English and A. Mareno, “Trajectories of rolling marbles on variousfunnels,” Am. J. Phys. 80, 996–1000 (2012).
13Gary D. White, “On trajectories of rolling marbles in cones and other
funnels,” Am. J. Phys. 81, 890–898 (2013).
14P. Carpena, C. Carretero-Campos, and A. V. Coronado, “On the circular
orbits of a particle sliding on the inside of a generic surface of revolution,”
Eur. J. Phys. 35, 015025 (2014).
350 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 5, May 2023 T. K. Timberlake and R. V. Mbenoun Mahend 350 04 October 2023 22:51:54
