
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkJANUARY 01 2022
The V aidya metric: Expected and unexpected traits of
evaporating black holes 
Julius Piesnack ; Klaus Kassner
Am. J. Phys.  90, 37–46 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/10.0006367
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Hawking temperatures for the V aidya and the Reissner-Nordstrom-V aidya black holes
AIP Conference Proceedings  (March 2016)
Energy transport in the V aidya system
J. Math. Phys.  (May 2005)
Exact solutions to the Dirac equation for neutrinos propagating in a particular V aidya background
J. Math. Phys.  (May 1994) 04 October 2023 22:59:49
The Vaidya metric: Expected and unexpected traits of evaporating
black holes
Julius Piesnack and Klaus Kassner
Institut f €ur Physik, Otto-von-Guericke-Universit €at, Magdeburg, Germany
(Received 1 March 2021; accepted 1 September 2021)
The ingoing Vaidya metric is introduced as a model for a non-rotating uncharged black hole
emitting Hawking radiation. This metric is expected to capture the physics of the spacetime forradial coordinates up to a small multiple ð>1Þof the Schwarzschild radius. For larger radii, it will
give an excellent approximation to the spacetime geometry in the case of astrophysical black holes
ðM/C21M
/C12Þ, except at extremely large distances from the horizon (exceeding the cosmic particle
horizon). In the classroom, the model may serve as a ﬁrst exploration of non-stationary
gravitational ﬁelds. Several interesting predictions are developed. First, particles dropped early
enough before complete evaporation of the black hole cross its horizon as easily as with an eternalblack hole. Second, the Schwarzschild radius takes on the properties of an apparent horizon, and
the true event horizon of the black hole is inside of it, because light can escape from the shrinking
apparent horizon. Third, a particle released from rest close enough to the apparent horizon isstrongly repelled and may escape to inﬁnity. An interpretation is given, demonstrating that such a
particle would be able to compete, for a short time, in a race with a photon.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/10.0006367
I. INTRODUCTION
Schwarzschild black holes1,2are among the most popular
examples of spacetimes studied in general relativity courses.Their metric is simple, enables a straightforward discussionof the four classical tests of general relativity, and allows
one to explore some strong-ﬁeld effects as well as the con-
cept of an event horizon.
The metric is stationary, so the effects of time-dependent
gravitational ﬁelds are absent. Beyond that, the interestingphenomenon of gravitational repulsion of radially infalling
particles does not arise in the Schwarzschild metric. It hap-
pens for charged spherically symmetric black holes,
described by the Reissner–Nordstr €om metric,
3but only well
inside the event horizon. Some non-stationary metrics turnout to exhibit it in more accessible places.
A simple time-dependent metric is the Vaidya metric,4
describing the exterior of a spherically symmetric mass dis-
tribution that absorbs or emits null dust, i.e., massless par-ticles. While spectacular time-dependent effects may bediscussed in studying the properties of gravitational waves,
5
the Vaidya metric is not devoid of some interesting oneseither.
Note that the Vaidya metric is not purely of academic
interest. It arises in a natural way in phenomenological mod-els of a black hole evaporating by Hawking radiation, an
object that is not fully describable by a stationary metric.
Since Vaidya metrics are models of the spacetime resulting
from Hawking radiation, not of the radiation itself (which ismostly electromagnetic in nature), Hawking radiation will
be hardly touched upon in the main part of this article.
Rather, we will give a discussion of its essential featuresin Sec. II, preceding the presentation of our model and its
results.
In 2005, Aste and Trautmann considered a toy model,
6in
which they made the mass term appearing in the
Schwarzschild metric dependent on the global time. With
this metric, they found that the black hole evaporates underan infalling particle, before the latter can cross the horizon.
It was pointed out7that this model is not physically meaning-
ful; the Schwarzschild time coordinate inside the event hori-
zon is unrelated to the time coordinate outside due to the fact
that it is not continuous across the horizon (diverging toinﬁnity there).
An improvement was suggested in Ref. 7, where
Gullstrand–Painlev /C19e (GP) coordinates8,9were taken as a
starting point to introduce a time-dependent mass parameter.These coordinates are continuous across the event horizon ofthe Schwarzschild spacetime, so making the mass time-
dependent at least has a well-deﬁned meaning. In this model,
an observer falling toward an evaporating black hole willordinarily cross the Schwarzschild radius without any prob-
lem (except close to the time of ﬁnal dissolution of the hole)
and then hit the central singularity in ﬁnite proper time.Clearly, this is still a toy model with a number of unrealistic
features. For example, since the mass parameter depends on
the time coordinate only, it will change instantaneously forall observers sitting at different radial positions. However,energy is radiated away at a ﬁnite velocity. Therefore, two
coordinate stationary observers with different radii should
experience, at the same time, the attraction of differentmasses inside their respective radial shells.
This problem may be solved by using Eddington–
Finkelstein (EF) coordinates
10,11instead. Making the mass
dependent on the EF time leads to a Vaidya metric, in whichthe mass parameter is constant not on a spacelike but on anull surface. Because this means that the radiated energy
moves at the speed of light, compatibility with causality is
achieved, and the emitted particles must be massless, such asphotons. The construction of such a metric is still a far cry
from producing a dynamical spacetime that would describe
an evaporating black hole in a quantum mechanically consis-tent way. We do not know the time dependence of Hawkingradiation at times close to the—presumed—ﬁnal disappear-
ance of the black hole, where quantum effects should
become strong, and we cannot calculate the back reaction
37 Am. J. Phys. 90(1), January 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 37 04 October 2023 22:59:49
between the Hawking radiation ﬂux and the evolving metric
non-perturbatively. Even a semiclassical self-consistent solu-tion does not seem to be available, in which the metric wouldbe a classical ﬁeld arising from the quantum mechanicalexpectation value hT
l/C23iof the stress-energy tensor.12
Nevertheless, the simplest guess at what the semiclassical
time-dependent metric of an evaporating black hole shouldlook like, subject to the condition of a minimum of realismregarding energy transport, would be a Vaidya metric, leav-ing one with the freedom to specify largely arbitrary time-dependent mass functions.
12
As will be discussed below, if the dynamical horizon of the
description is to correspond to a future horizon, the metricmust be an ingoing Vaidya metric. Such a metric with a massparameter that decreases as a function of time corresponds toa black hole losing mass by infalling negative-energy nulldust. This feature, while acceptable near the horizon (as willbe seen in Sec. II), is not very realistic far from it, where
Hawking radiation clearly is outgoing and consists ofpositive-energy particles. Then, to add more realism to themodel, the ingoing Vaidya metric near the horizon should becomplemented by an outgoing one at larger radial coordi-nates, with the surface joining the two metrics correspondingto a pair creation location.
13A few years ago, a model for an
evaporating black hole without any spacetime singularitieswas presented that employs these features.14Since our pur-
pose is to present a model that is useful in exploring physicaleffects in the classroom, we stick to the simplest case dis-cussed by Hiscock
12containing some elements of realism,
i.e., just an ingoing Vaidya metric. Local results near the hori-zon then should have validity, but the assessment of theresults obtained at large radii needs additional scrutiny.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. After
the explanatory Sec. IIon Hawking radiation, we consider,
in Sec. III, the maximally extended Schwarzschild metric in
a diagram using Kruskal–Szekeres (KS) coordinates.
15,16
Discussing which regions of the full spacetime are covered
by the ingoing and outgoing EF coordinates, we decidewhich of the two sets is the best starting point in constructinga Vaidya metric. Section IVgives the equations of motion
for a test particle falling radially into the model black holeand simpliﬁes them to a form that can be compared with theNewtonian limit. These equations are solved numerically inSec. V. The existence of repulsive effects of the time-
dependent gravitational ﬁeld is demonstrated analytically.Finally, some conclusions are given in Sec. VI.
II. HAWKING RADIATION
Hawking provided a physical mechanism for Bekenstein’s
idea that the area of the event horizon of a black hole corre-
sponds to its entropy and its surface gravity to its tempera-
ture
17,18(each with the appropriate proportionality constant).
In two papers exploring this quantum mechanical mecha-nism,
19,20he presented a calculation based on quantum ﬁeld
theoretical considerations, according to which a ﬁeld operatorassociated with a vacuum state in Minkowski spacetime (at
past null inﬁnity I
/C0) will, after the spacetime has become
curved due to the formation of a black hole, be associatedwith a state of non-zero particle content near the event hori-zon. Some of these particles, mostly photons, escape to future
null inﬁnity I
þ, and the calculation proceeds by following
the ﬁeld at Iþbackward in time through the interaction withthe collapsing star to I/C0, using analytic continuation techni-
ques to evaluate the spectral properties of the so-created radia-
tion, which turns out to be thermal with temperature and
entropy given by the Bekenstein expressions. The ﬁeld calcu-
lation may be visualized in terms of a wave picture, with the
properties of the ingoing wave coming from I/C0modiﬁed by
its interaction with the event horizon. Detailed considerations
involve negative frequency components of the wave falling
into the black hole and positive frequency components being
ampliﬁed, allowing part of them to escape to Iþ.
It should be noted that Hawking himself provided an alter-
native picture of the process already in the extended version
of his ﬁrst explanation of the effect.20It focuses on the parti-
cle content of the quantum ﬁelds involved rather than on thedecomposition of the ﬁeld into waves with amplitudes given
by annihilation and creation operators. In this picture,
Hawking described a negative energy ﬂux inward across the
horizon, coming from the surrounding region in which, by
virtue of quantum ﬂuctuations, pairs of virtual particlesappear and disappear. One of these typically has positive and
the other negative energy (so as to satisfy energy conserva-
tion in the long run). He then stated:
20“The negative particle
is in a region which is classically forbidden but it can tunnel
through the event horizon to the region inside the black hole
where the Killing vector which represents time translations
is spacelike. In this region the particle can exist as a real par-
ticle with a timelike momentum vector even though itsenergy relative to inﬁnity as measured by the time translation
Killing vector is negative. The other particle of the pair, hav-
ing a positive energy, can escape to inﬁnity where it consti-tutes a part of the thermal emission described above. […]
Instead of thinking of negative energy particles tunneling
through the horizon in the positive sense of time one could
regard them as positive energy particles crossing the horizon
on past-directed world-lines and then being scattered on tofuture-directed world-lines by the gravitational ﬁeld.”
Although Hawking emphasized that this is a heuristic pic-
ture, not to be taken too literally, it may be more appealingthan the picture of positive-frequency and negative-
frequency wave components, where the energy balance is
not readily visible with the overall wave consisting predomi-
nantly of positive-frequency components.
Of course, when talking of particles here, we mean
quantum particles without committing ourselves to their
manifestation in a localized or wavy manner. In fact, the par-
ticles of Hawking radiation are not very pointlike. The wave-
length of the maximum of the spectrum of Hawkingradiation for a solar-mass black hole is about 47 km at inﬁn-
ity, whereas the Schwarzschild radius is a mere 3 km. So
these photons would be detectable with antennas rather than
with photomultipliers, i.e., they would be considered waves
rather than particles. Moreover, they are so poorly localizedthat it is impossible to indicate a single value for the redshift
they have undergone since their creation near the black hole
horizon (because the redshift is signiﬁcantly different for dif-ferent parts of the wave). A wave emerging at about two
Schwarzschild radii from the center of the geometry will
have only a roughly 40% higher frequency at that position
than at inﬁnity, meaning that its most probable wavelength
would still be more than 30 km. Photons with such wave-lengths might easily tunnel distances on the order of 10 km,
i.e., three Schwarzschild radii. Hence, in adopting the parti-
cle picture, we should not imagine the radiation to come
38 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 J. Piesnack and K. Kassner 38 04 October 2023 22:59:49
from the surface constituted by the horizon. Its location of
creation may be washed out with an uncertainty on the orderof the Schwarzschild radius. In fact, the “quantum atmos-phere,” in which Hawking radiation is created, has recentlybeen estimated, from a 1 þ1 dimensional calculation, to
extend in the radial coordinate from 1.5 to 2 Schwarzschildradii.
21
Newer calculations of Hawking radiation have been
presented,22which are much closer in spirit to the picture of
tunneling quantum particles than Hawking’s original one.One advantage of calculations that are manifestly based on atunneling process is that it is not necessary to consider thecomplete collapse geometry before formation of the blackhole. While the details of the collapse do not inﬂuence theﬁnal result, the picture usually drawn, having null trajecto-ries in a Penrose diagram that connect I
/C0withIþ(and
pile up near the horizon) may favor misconceptions, such
as the idea that all of Hawking radiation comes from thetime before the surface of the collapsing star crosses thehorizon,
23which would mean that the black hole remains
incipient forever, i.e., that it does not actually form. A nice
compact discussion of features of Hawking radiation may befound in Ref. 24.
Experimental veriﬁcation of Hawking radiation from a
typical black hole with a mass exceeding that of our sun isvirtually impossible, because the effect is so tiny. It has beensuggested
25thatsonic black holes (in which a ﬂuid takes on
supersonic speeds so that there should be Hawking-likesound emission from the “sonic horizon”) might allowexperimental access to the phenomenon. Indeed, success indetecting Hawking radiation from a Bose–Einstein conden-sate as a black hole analog was reported recently.
26
Returning to real black holes, an object falling toward the
event horizon seems to get slower and freeze there due to thefact that photons take longer and longer to escape fromthe vicinity of the horizon. What is more, it turns out that theobject will take inﬁnite Schwarzschild time to actually reach
the horizon, so the slowing-down would, it appears, not justbe an optical illusion. That a black hole dissolves viaHawking radiation in ﬁnite time then leads to an apparent
paradox: If it takes inﬁnite time for an observer to fall intoan eternal black hole with ﬁxed event horizon, falling into anevaporating black hole should also take inﬁnite time. Afterall, the attracting mass decreases and the horizon recedes, soif anything, one should expect an infaller to take longer forthe evaporating black hole than for the static one, but thenthe black hole must disappear, before the observer can fall
into it. This of course begs the question how an event hori-zon could form in the ﬁrst place, because the surface of the
star will, on collapse, behave similarly to the infaller. On the
other hand, observers can fall into eternal black holes withina ﬁnite interval of their proper time and Hawking radiation isa weak effect for stellar-mass black holes, which suggeststhat crossing of the event horizon by an observer should hap-pen essentially in the same way as for a static black hole, butit is a contradiction for an observer to both fall and not fallinto a black hole. This paradox has been resolved in Ref. 7
modeling the metric of an evaporating black hole appropri-ately, by use of a time coordinate that does not diverge at thehorizon and is resolved in this paper the same way (but usinga different time coordinate).
In such a model, there must be a region of negative energy
density outside the horizon, as transpires from the quotereproduced above from Hawking’s 1975 paper.
20In classicalgeneral relativity, negative energy density is considered
forbidden and solutions requiring it are viewed as unrealiz-
able, but in the presence of quantum mechanics, they cannot
be discarded automatically. Our considerations in the follow-ing will be based on a classical model, but negative energy
density is admitted in order to mimic the quantum effect of
negative-energy virtual particles.
III. THE SCHWARZSCHILD SPACETIME IN TERMS
OF EDDINGTON–FINKELSTEIN COORDINATES
In this section, we illustrate the idea that different coordi-
nate systems may cover different parts of the spacetime man-
ifold. The necessity to capture certain features (such as a
future event horizon) in the description may then restrict thechoice of possible coordinates.
The maximally extended Schwarzschild solution, corre-
sponding to an eternal spherically symmetric black hole—
and a bit more—is describable via KS coordinates. Theresulting diagram given in Fig. 1will also be useful in exhib-
iting the difference between the two EF coordinate systems.
The metric is
27
ds2¼4r3
s
re/C0r=rsdT2/C0dX2 ðÞ /C0r2dX2; (1)
where rs¼2GM=c2deﬁnes the Schwarzschild radius ( Mis
the black hole mass, GNewton’s gravitational constant, c
the vacuum speed of light) and d X2¼d#2þsin2#du2
abbreviates the line element on a unit sphere. The radial
coordinate rof the Schwarzschild metric is expressible via X
andTwith the help of X2/C0T2¼r=rs/C01 ðÞ er=rs.
The diagram of Fig. 1may be read as giving a two-
dimensional section of the spacetime at ﬁxed #andu.O n e
of its interesting features is that radial light rays are parallel
Fig. 1. Kruskal–Szekeres diagram of the maximally extended Schwarzschild
metric. Loci of constant Schwarzschild time coordinate tcorrespond to
straight lines through the origin (a line t¼t/C3is drawn explicitly). Loci of
constant Schwarzschild radial coordinate rare given by hyperbolas having
the angle bisectors of the axes as asymptotes (the lines r¼0 are drawn) or,
in the limit r¼rs, by these bisectors themselves. Two sets of Schwarzschild
coordinates are necessary to cover all four regions. The solid hatch lines cor-
respond to (non-equidistant) constant null coordinates vin the ingoing
Eddington–Finkelstein metric, and the dashed ones to constant coordinates u
in the outgoing EF metric. Other features are explained in the text.
39 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 J. Piesnack and K. Kassner 39 04 October 2023 22:59:49
to either of the two bisectors of the pair of coordinate axes,
so it is easy to discuss the exchange of light signalsof observers in the geometry.28Event horizons are given in
Fig.1by the future and past light cones of the origin. The
Schwarzschild time coordinate is timelike only in the regionsI and III ( X>jTjandX</C0jTj, respectively) but spacelike
in the regions II and IV ( T>jXjandT</C0jXj, respectively,
with T
2/C0X2<1), because the absolute value of the slope
of any straight line through the origin is bigger than 1 inthese two regions.29Correspondingly, the coordinate r
behaves like a spatial coordinate in regions I and III, but likea time coordinate in regions II and IV.
Customarily, region I ( r>r
s;/C01 <t<1) is considered
as describing the outside of a Schwarzschild black hole. Thecomplete set of Schwarzschild coordinates, including r<r
s;
/C01 <t<1, then either describes regions I and II or
regions I and IV. That Schwarzschild coordinates becomesingular at r¼r
smay be seen from the fact that all points
with r¼rs(except ðX;TÞ¼ð 0;0Þ) also have either t¼1
ort¼/C0 1 , so the pair ðr;tÞ¼ð rs;1Þactually describes an
inﬁnite set of events instead of a single one (and so doesðr;tÞ¼ð r
s;/C01Þ ).30The patches of Schwarzschild coordi-
nates separated by r¼rsare not continuously connected
(tbecomes inﬁnite between them), therefore the ambiguity
whether r<rscorresponds to region II or IV. In practice,
identiﬁcation is always made with region II, because thehorizon between regions IV and I, sometimes called antihori-zon,
31is permeable from IV to I only and thus corresponds
to a white hole (into which nothing can fall, but from which
stuff may be ejected). The vacuum solution, described bythe metric (1), is not applicable inside a star, so observers in
region I will see an illusory horizon31(the surface of the col-
lapsing star) instead of an antihorizon. Once a black hole hasformed, the vacuum part of the metric will resemble that ofan eternal black hole with only regions I and II explorable.
A pair of photons, one escaping one infalling, is indicated
in Fig. 1—the ﬁrst drawn as a solid arrow and the second as
a dashed arrow.
32This is to illustrate the point that for an
observer A, whose approximate position is marked in the
ﬁgure, Hawking radiation seems to come from the illusoryhorizon,31because he will not see the infalling photon and
the trajectory of the escaping one is parallel to the horizon in
the KS diagram. However, an observer Bwho is closer to the
illusory horizon will not see that particular photon, becauseit does not really come from the surface of the collapsingstar. For a shrinking black hole, observer Awill see radiation
that was emitted at a slightly higher temperature than thatseen by B,
33and the difference in photon content was created
in the spacetime interval between the two observers, whichtypically will mean that it was created after the observationmade at B’s spacetime position but before the observation by
A. An observer falling freely through the horizon should not
detect any Hawking radiation at all at the crossing point, ifthe equivalence principle continues to hold at the horizon, assuggested by Ref. 34.
35
Let us now discuss EF coordinates. One way to obtain
them from Schwarzschild coordinates is to ﬁrst introduce thetortoise coordinate,
r
/C3¼rþrsln/C12/C12/C12/C12r
rs/C01/C12/C12/C12/C12; (2)
which approaches /C01 asr!rsand then to introduce, as
new time coordinate, eitherv¼tþr/C3
c; (3)
yielding the ingoing EF metric with coordinates v,r,#, and
uor
u¼t/C0r/C3
c; (4)
which gives the outgoing EF metric with coordinates u,r,#,
andu. It is then easy to determine the coordinate transforma-
tions leading from the KS metric to the EF metrics. These
are
X¼1
2ecv=2rsþ1
2r
rs/C01/C18/C19
er=rs/C0cv=2rs;
T¼1
2ecv=2rs/C01
2r
rs/C01/C18/C19
er=rs/C0cv=2rs; (5)
and
X¼1
2e/C0cu=2rsþ1
2r
rs/C01/C18/C19
er=rsþcu=2rs;
T¼/C01
2e/C0cu=2rsþ1
2r
rs/C01/C18/C19
er=rsþcu=2rs; (6)
respectively. We note that all values /C01 <v<1and
0<r<1are admissible in the transformation (5).
Moreover, for r>rs, we have X>0, which excludes region
III, and for r<rs, we have T>0, which excludes region IV.
Therefore, ingoing EF coordinates cover regions I and II con-
tinuously. This is depicted in Fig. 1by the region with solid
hatch lines. Since constant vimplies that XþT¼const :(as
follows immediately from (5)), the hatch lines also corre-
spond to lines of constant coordinate v.S o vis a null coordi-
nate rather than a timelike one; at a ﬁxed position r,i tm a y
nonetheless nicely serve as a time coordinate.
Similar considerations for Eqs. (6)show that outgoing EF
coordinates cover the regions I and IV continuously; they
describe a white-hole metric. The dashed hatching depicts
their region of validity and dashed lines correspond to linesof constant coordinate u.
It is then clear that if we wish to describe an evaporating
black hole (with a future horizon), our starting point should
not be outgoing but ingoing EF coordinates. In terms ofthese, the Schwarzschild line element reads
ds
2¼1/C0rs
r/C18/C19
c2dv2/C02cdvdr/C0r2dX2: (7)
This metric is nonsingular at r¼rs, in spite of the fact that
the prefactor of d v2vanishes there. The non-diagonal term
/dvdrensures that none of the eigenvalues of the metric
become zero at r¼rs.
IV. INGOING VAIDYA METRIC AND EQUATIONS
OF MOTION
A model for an evaporating black hole is obtained by
allowing the Schwarzschild radius to become v-dependent,
which produces an ingoing Vaidya metric,
40 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 J. Piesnack and K. Kassner 40 04 October 2023 22:59:49
ds2¼1/C0rsðvÞ
r/C18/C19
c2dv2/C02cdvdr/C0r2dX2: (8)
Our goal is then to study the equations of motions of par-
ticles moving in this metric, in order to become conversant
with the geodesic motion in this non-stationary setting.
The Vaidya metric is not a vacuum solution. However,
only one of the covariant components of the Ricci tensor is
non-zero: Rvv¼r0
sðvÞc=r2¼2GM0ðvÞ=r2c. The scalar curva-
ture vanishes. Hence, the stress-energy tensor also has only
one nonvanishing element in the coordinates used in (8),
which is given by Tvv¼M0ðvÞc3=4pr2. Note that this is neg-
ative, if the mass Mis a decreasing function of v.
Consider the line of constant Schwarzschild time t¼t/C3
drawn in Fig. 1. Moving upward to the right on this line
means increasing v,a stremains constant but rincreases (Eq.
(3)). This means that observers at larger rand ﬁxed t¼t/C3
see smaller masses inside a sphere of radius r,a sM(v) dimin-
ishes with increasing v. This must be so for the ingoing
Vaidya metric, because with increasing r, more and more
negative-energy null dust is between the observer at rand
the horizon.
However, this is not what is to be expected far from the
horizon for a true evaporating black hole. Hawking radiation
is outgoing and has positive energy density, so the mass
inside a sphere of radius rshould increase with rat constant
t. Note that this would be the case if the mass depended on
the coordinate uof the outgoing EF coordinates. The value
ofuis inﬁnite at X¼T(see Eq. (6)) and decreases along
the line t¼t/C3as one moves to the right (Eq. (4)). Therefore,
far from the horizon, the outgoing Vaidya metric is more
compatible with Hawking radiation than the ingoing one, but
near the horizon, the retarded Vaidya time ubecomes singu-
lar, so for a description including the horizon and its interior,
it is not an option, whereas the ingoing Vaidya metric works
ﬁne and its negative energy density agrees with quantum
mechanical considerations. We do not switch between the
two metrics (at some prescribed surface) as was done in
Refs. 13and14, because the model would become unneces-
sarily complicated. The effects to be discussed here will be
(slightly) modiﬁed quantitatively by such a model improve-
ment but not qualitatively. A detailed discussion of the qual-
ity of the approximation is given after Eq. (19), at the end of
this section.
To specify the model completely, we will assume
rsvðÞ¼k0vl/C0vðÞ1=3forv/C20vl;
0 for v>vl:(
(9)
This time dependence arises from the relationship for
Hawking radiation emitted by a macroscopic black hole and
as seen by a distant observer. The temperature of a black
hole is inversely proportional to its mass20,36
TBHðMÞ¼/C22hc3
8pGkBM; (10)
where Planck’s and Boltzmann’s constants appear in
standard notations. The thermal radiation of a black body at
this temperature is proportional not only to T4
BHbut also
to the surface area of the black hole, which goes as
r2
s/M2/T/C02
BH, so the total power output is proportional to
T2
BH/M/C02,PBHMðÞ¼/C22hc6
153 60 pG2M/C02; (11)
from which we obtain a differential equation for the mass,
dM
dv¼/C0/C22hc4
153 60 pG2M2; (12)
which is solved by M3ðvÞ¼ ~kðvl/C0vÞ, where
vl¼5120 M3
0pG2
/C22hc4(13)
is the lifetime of the black hole, M0is its initial mass, and
~k¼M3
0=vl. The quantity k0is then just 2 G~k1=3=c2(so that
rsð0Þ¼2GM 0=c2). In Ref. 12, it is argued that the depen-
dency (9), based on a ﬁxed-background calculation, cannot
hold down to mass zero, as this would lead to an inﬁnite ﬂux
of radiated particles. At least near the end of evaporation, the
functional law must then be modiﬁed, an effect that we have
studied but which has little impact on the results given here,
so we skip its discussion.
The equations of motion for a test particle falling freely in
the Vaidya spacetime may be obtained from the Lagrangian,
L¼ 1/C0rsðvÞ
r/C18/C19
c2_v2/C02c_v_r/C0r2_#2þsin2#_u2/C16/C17
;(14)
in which a dot denotes a derivative with respect to the proper
timesof the particle. The Euler–Lagrange equations read
d
ds@L
@_q/C0@L
@q¼0: (15)
Writing them out for q¼uandq¼#, we ﬁnd that they are
solved by u¼const :and#¼const :Therefore, purely radial
geodesics exist and to ﬁnd these, we may consider an effec-tive Lagrangian, obtained from Eq. (14)by dropping the last
two terms. The equations for the two other coordinates then
areðr
s;v/C17drs=dv¼r0
sðvÞÞ
1/C0rs
r/C18/C19
c€vþrs
r2c_v_r/C0€r/C0rs;v
2rc_v2¼0; (16)
€vþrs
2r2c_v2¼0; (17)
and the deﬁnition of the effective Lagrangian will be useful
for simpliﬁcations of the equations of motion,
ds
ds/C18/C192
¼c2¼1/C0rsðvÞ
r/C18/C19
c2_v2/C02c_v_r: (18)
This expresses that the four-speed of a massive particle is
equal to c. First, we use (17) in(16) to eliminate €vand then
we replace the newly arisen term ð1/C0rsðvÞ=rÞc2_v2with the
help of (18)(byc2þ2c_v_r), which leads to a cancellation of
all mixed terms containing the product _v_r. The result is
€r¼/C0rsðvÞ
2r2c2/C0r0
sðvÞ
2rc_v2: (19)
Equations (19)and(17)together with the side condition (18)
on the four-velocity constitute the equations to be solved for
41 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 J. Piesnack and K. Kassner 41 04 October 2023 22:59:49
radial fall toward the evaporating black hole. They are equiv-
alent to a set of three ﬁrst-order equations. In fact, it can beshown that Eq. (17) is a consequence of Eqs. (19) and(18)
(at least for rvalues greater than r
sðvÞ). A unique solution
requires initial conditions for r(usually >rs),_r, and v.
In the limit rs¼const :, i.e., for an eternal black hole,
the second term on the RHS of Eq. (19)is zero and inserting
the deﬁnition of the Schwarzschild radius, we obtain
€r¼/C0GM=r2, which has the same form as Newton’s law for
the free fall of a particle in the gravitational ﬁeld of a pointmass (or a spherically symmetric mass distribution withradius smaller than r). Since the time derivatives are with
respect to proper time rather than absolute Newtonian time,the dynamics will look Newtonian only at sufﬁciently smallvelocities, as long as the difference between the rate ofproper time of the particle and that of an external observerdoes not become visible.
If we now take a temporal variation of the mass term r
s
into account, then we have both contributions, the ﬁrst being
a generalized Newtonian law with time-dependent mass term(r
sðvÞ MðvÞ) and the standard 1 =r2dependence, whereas
the second term contains the time derivative of the mass anddecays as 1 =r. For diminishing mass, the second term is posi-
tive, so it is a repulsive contribution to the acceleration ofthe test particle.
In a Newtonian universe, we would expect only the ﬁrst
term to be present (with the advanced time in the argumentofr
sreplaced by absolute time). This should be true even
when the mass varies with time, because Newtonian gravity
spreads instantaneously. Hence, what we see in generalrelativity instead is an effect of gravity traveling at a ﬁnitevelocity.
Let us estimate the relative sizes of the second and ﬁrst
terms. For v<v
l, the ratio between their magnitudes is
Q¼jr0
sðvÞjr_v2
rsðvÞc¼r_v2
3cðvl/C0vÞ/C25r_v2
3cvl: (20)
The last approximation is valid for black holes having a
mass bigger than that of the sun and up to times vwell
exceeding the current lifetime of the universe (13 :8/C2109y),
because we have vl>2:1/C21067y¼6:6/C21074s. From Eq.
(18), we obtain the estimates _v<1=ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
1/C0rs=rp
for negative
_rand _v<1þﬃﬃﬃ
2p/C0/C1
=1/C0rs=r ðÞ for positive _r<c. Hence, if
we require the radius rto be larger than 1 :01rs, we have
_v2<6=ð1/C0rs=rÞ2<105. Setting an upper limit for the
radial coordinate by requiring r<1011ly/C251027m, which is
larger than the particle horizon of the currently favored
model of the universe, we ﬁnd that Q<1:7/C210/C052in the
speciﬁed temporal and spatial range.
On time scales of the current lifetime of the universe, rsis
constant for non-rotating astrophysical black holes(M/C21M
/C12, the mass of the sun), as long as nothing falls on
them. The reason is that the power output of their Hawkingradiation is extremely small (below 10
/C028W), leading to a
negligible amount of radiated energy in comparison withtheir mass energy for at least 10
50y. Obviously, such a black
hole must be very well described by the Schwarzschildgeometry, except possibly (very) close to the horizon. Our
estimate shows that the ingoing Vaidya metric is, on the
radial and time scales discussed, indistinguishable from theSchwarzschild metric (written in EF coordinates), as wouldbe the outgoing Vaidya metric with comparable parameters.Therefore, radial particle trajectories in the spacetime of a
non-rotating astrophysical black hole will be described to anextremely good approximation by Eq. (19) forr>1:01r
s
and time scales of up to a few billion years.
Closer to the horizon, the static approximation may be
insufﬁcient, because the second term of Eq. (19)can become
large, but there, the ingoing Vaidya metric should be good,because it faithfully reproduces the negative energy densitynear the horizon. According to a fairly rigorous calculationin 1þ1 dimensions,
37the sum of the outgoing and ingoing
ﬂuxes in the radial rest frame, which is proportional toT
uuþTvv, becomes zero at r/C251:6rs(and is negative for
smaller r), so the Vaidya metric with its negative energy den-
sity should be good up to about this radial coordinate, and
this should be true independent of the mass of the black hole.This is also consistent with Ref. 21. Hence, for black holes
of realistic size, approximating the metric via the ingoingVaidya metric will be viable for all interesting regions ofspacetime. Moreover, it has the advantage of analytic acces-sibility that is lost, if instead we patch two or more metricstogether
13in order to gain a tiny bit of accuracy at larger r.
In order to render the time-dependent Schwarzschild
radius visible in our ﬁgures in Sec. V, we have to consider
black holes with much smaller masses than will be found in
astrophysics. For these, we expect the ingoing Vaidya metricto be a good approximation up to r¼1:6r
sand a decent
approximation out to a few more Schwarzschild radii, soanswers obtained from it should be qualitatively correct.Results will become qualitatively incorrect , once the second
term of Eq. (19)becomes bigger than the ﬁrst one at large r ,
due to the fact that the second term falls off with a weaker
power of rthan the ﬁrst. The dominant second term will then
have the wrong sign, because it would be attractive for anoutgoing Vaidya metric.
V. NUMERICAL SOLUTION AND ANALYTIC
DISCUSSION
To gain understanding about the dynamics in this metric,
the equations of motion should be integrated numerically forexemplary situations. They are simple enough to make this anice practical exercise.
In a number of cases, we solved the geodesic equations
beyond the evaporation time, where the derivative of r
sðvÞ
has a singularity /ðvl/C0vÞ/C02=3. This poses an obstacle to
direct numerical integration. Solvers for ordinary differentialequations with time step control will not normally cross thatpoint, in attempting to resolve the singularity. Therefore, anumerical approach avoiding the appearance of divergingquantities was developed. Its details will not be presentedhere, in order to keep the paper concise.
38
In Fig. 2, the trajectories of a particle released from rest at
different heights and approaching the Schwarzschild radius
well before evaporation are presented. The parameters arethe same as in Fig. 1 of Ref. 7and the outcome is similar.
The particle falls into the black hole in all cases.
Our results are given in terms of nondimensional varia-
bles, with ^r/C17r
sð0Þchosen as the length unit and the speed
of light set equal to 1. Then the time unit is also ﬁxed (at thevalue ^v¼r
sð0Þ=c). By choosing a nondimensional value for
the time vlof evaporation, deﬁned by rsðvlÞ¼0, we there-
fore ﬁx a physical quantity, which is the initial mass of the
black hole. To see this, consider
42 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 J. Piesnack and K. Kassner 42 04 October 2023 22:59:49
vl
^v¼cvl
rsð0Þ¼2560 M2
0pG
/C22hc¼2560pM2
0
m2
p; (21)
where mp¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
/C22hc=Gp
¼2:176/C210/C08kg is the Planck mass.
For the values vl=^v¼100, 10, and 5 used in our ﬁgures, we
have M0¼0:112mp;0:0352 mp, and 0 :0249 mp, respec-
tively, extremely small masses indeed. Black holes with sucha small mass cannot arise from direct gravitational collapse.They might be the result of a density ﬂuctuation in some
violent subatomic process, of a kind that could possibly have
arisen very shortly after the big bang. These black holeswould, however, have long since vanished. Yet, it is con-ceivable that some primordial black holes starting out with
masses around 1 :8/C210
11kg, approaching the end of their
life today, might have current masses close to a Planck mass.
The reason for considering such unrealistic cases here is that
for a black hole of about one solar mass, the nondimensional
vlw o u l db eo nt h eo r d e ro f1 080, and the Schwarzschild radius
would look constant in our ﬁgures. To see a particle actually sur-vive the evaporation of the black hole, we must tune its startingdistance and time so that it closes in on the horizon position only
near the point of complete evaporation (or later).
Before looking at this kind of behavior, let us brieﬂy clar-
ify whether the Schwarzschild radius r
sðvÞis still an event
horizon, when rsis decreasing as a function of time. The
equation of motion for an outgoing radial light ray follows
from Eq. (8)by setting d X¼0;ds¼0, and d v6¼0:
dr
dv¼1
2c1/C0rsðvÞ
r/C18/C19
: (22)
This has been integrated in Fig. 3for a few initial values r
¼r0close to rsð0Þ.
A light ray sent from the Schwarzschild radius rsð0Þwill
obviously escape, having zero coordinate velocity at v¼0
and positive velocity at any later time. Interestingly, somerays starting their journey with r<r
sð0Þmanage to cross the
shrinking Schwarzschild radius, which therefore is not a true
event horizon anymore, but rather an apparent horizon. Anapparent horizon is a limiting trapped null surface; i.e.,outward-directed light rays emitted outside the apparent
horizon will move outward, while outward-directed light
rays emitted inside it will move inward.Escaping light rays from inside start falling inward but do
so more slowly than the horizon shrinks, so they are passed
by the latter and afterward move outward. Light sent from
sufﬁciently far inside this apparent horizon will, however,fall into the singularity, so there still exists an event horizon,separating events from which null inﬁnity can never bereached from those that may send signals to null inﬁnity.That horizon, however, does not exist indeﬁnitely; it is goneafter the time v
l. Moreover, if quantum mechanics leads to
avoidance of the singularity as is generally believed, possibly
replacing it with a fuzzy region of ﬂuctuating spacetime thatcontains quantum ﬁelds at high energy density, whateverwas caught in that high-energy density region would get outagain (albeit transformed into photons or other elementaryparticles), once the region dissolved, and escape to futurenull or timelike inﬁnity; but then there would be no event
horizon by deﬁnition.
Let us next consider a situation, where it is possible for a par-
ticle to miss the singularity in the black hole. This is depicted inFig. 4. Particles starting from a radius slightly exceeding
3:2r
sð0Þwill not cross the apparent horizon. The inward veloc-
ity of both the particle starting at 3 :5rsð0Þa n dt h a ts t a r t i n ga t
4rsð0Þdecreases a little just before complete evaporation, which
is obviously due to the repulsive term in (19).
The model can even produce overall repulsion after an ini-
tial phase of inward falling.39However, since for this to hap-
pen, the second term of Eq. (19)must become larger than the
ﬁrst one, due to rgetting large, the ingoing Vaidya metric
will not be a good model for an evaporating black hole any-more, so we will not consider this case here.
Let us instead determine the range of r
0values, for which
the force on the particle is repulsive already in the initial
phase of its fall. Since we release it from rest, we mayassume that _r/C250. Using (18), we then express _v
2by func-
tions of rand valone and ﬁnd from Eq. (19),
€r¼/C0rsðvÞc2
2r2þr0
sðvÞc
2ðrs/C0rÞ: (23)
Setting €r¼0, we obtain a quadratic equation for rwith the
roots,40
r01¼/C0rsc
2rs;vþﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
r2
sc2
4r2
s;vþr2
sc
rs;vs
/C25
rs/C28r/C0rsc
rs;v¼3cvl; (24)Fig. 2. Trajectories of radially infalling particles in the Vaidya metric (8).
^r¼rsð0Þ,^v¼rsð0Þ=c. The unit ^rhas been left out in the legend for brevity,
i.e.,r0=^rhas been renamed to r0.Fig. 3. Light sent radially outward from positions near the initial
Schwarzschild radius.
43 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 J. Piesnack and K. Kassner 43 04 October 2023 22:59:49
r02¼/C0rsc
2rs;v/C0ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
r2
sc2
4r2
s;vþr2
sc
rs;vs
/C25
rs;v/C28crs1þrs
3cvl/C18/C19
:(25)
Repulsion dominates for r0>r01and r0<r02. The ﬁrst
result is irrelevant to stellar-mass evaporating black holes,
because it is exorbitantly large, bigger than 6 :3/C21067ly,
well beyond 1050times the particle horizon of the universe.
On the other hand, the second result tells us that there is
repulsion in the ingoing Vaidya metric with decreasing massslightly outside, but near, the Schwarzschild radius. Thisclose to the horizon, the ingoing Vaidya metric can be safelyassumed to yield a decent description!
We ﬁrst verify the validity of the analytic prediction by
numerical simulation. Figure 5gives the trajectories, for
v
l=^v¼10, of a particle starting at a radius that exceeds rsð0Þ
by just one percent and of one starting only one thousandthofr
sð0Þabove the apparent horizon. Equation (25) predicts
initial repulsion for rs<r0<1:033rshere.
The ﬁrst particle starts moving away from the apparent
horizon, being repelled more strongly than attracted, but asits distance from r
sðvÞincreases, it is pulled back, turns
around, and ﬁnally falls into the singularity. However, thesecond particle, starting signiﬁcantly closer to the apparent
horizon, experiences such a strong repulsion that it actuallyescapes from the black hole. In order to gain some under-
standing, we have also plotted the trajectory of an outgoinglight ray starting together with the second particle. What
becomes immediately clear is that the two trajectories are
pretty close to each other, so the particle reaches a speed thatis close to the speed of light. It is then easy to form a mean-ingful mental picture by remembering the river model of a
black hole, proposed by Hamilton and Lisle.
41According to
this idea, space about a black hole may be viewed as ﬂowinginward across the event horizon, where it reaches the speedof light. This explains nicely why nothing can cross the event
horizon from the inside out—motion relative to space cannot
exceed the speed of light.
42With the Vaidya metric, inﬂow-
ing space reaches the speed of light at the time-dependentapparent horizon rather than at the event horizon,43but
otherwise the situation is similar. Positioning a particle at
rest slightly above the apparent horizon actually meansgiving it a very high outward speed with respect to theinﬂowing space. The closer to the apparent horizon this is
done, the closer the outward speed is to the speed of light. A
particle extremely close to the apparent horizon should,therefore, move like a photon. Since outgoing light willalways escape when emitted outside the horizon, a massive
particle close enough to it will do the same.
Note that it is impossible to start a particle from rest inside
the apparent horizon, as its velocity with respect to the inﬂow-ing space would have to exceed c. However, it is possible to
give a particle slightly inside, and close to, the apparent hori-
zon an initial condition corresponding to a sufﬁciently small
inward velocity so that the shrinking horizon will catch upwith it, allowing it to escape to inﬁnity. Indeed, we ﬁnd insimulations (not shown) that a particle which is started
slightly inside the initial Schwarzschild radius with a coordi-
nate velocity not signiﬁcantly below u
0¼/C0cﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
rsð0Þ=r0/C01p
manages to cross the apparent horizon and to escape to future
timelike inﬁnity.
We expect this result to be robust with regard to a modiﬁ-
cation of the metric outside of a neighborhood of rs. Any out-
side metric patched to the ingoing Vaidya metric must not
add an additional horizon. Light that reaches the outer metricwill, therefore, escape to future inﬁnity. A particle acceler-ated to relativistic velocities by the inner metric will then
generally also escape to inﬁnity on entering the outer metric.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
The Vaidya metric is an appealing tool to present certain
effects of non-stationary gravitational ﬁelds in classroom,
having applications to black hole evaporation. Simple analyt-
ical results demonstrate interesting physical effects, in partic-ular, gravitational repulsion in the presence of a shrinkingapparent horizon. The numerical studies presented here are
not too advanced and can be assigned to students as
exercises.
Use of the ingoing Vaidya metric with a decreasing mass
term is motivated by its utility in modeling a spacetimegeometry with a shrinking future (apparent) horizon. We
have argued that this kind of description is reasonable near
and outside the apparent horizon, because negative energydensity is expected to arise there due to quantum effects,
20,37
and the Vaidya metric considered describes an inﬂow of
negative energy carried by null dust. If we take Hawking’s
view that this is the same as an outﬂow of positive-energyparticles along past-directed geodesics, then we can say thatFig. 4. Trajectories missing and hitting the black hole.
Fig. 5. Trajectories of particles released from rest at r0¼1:01rsð0Þand
r0¼1:001rsð0Þ. The second particle escapes to inﬁnity. The path of a light
ray starting from the same r0as the second particle is given for comparison.
44 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 J. Piesnack and K. Kassner 44 04 October 2023 22:59:49
what the ingoing Vaidya metric fails to account for is the
ﬁnal scattering of these quanta off the gravitational ﬁeld that
makes their path future-directed again. This would certainly
be bad, if the purpose was to describe these particles, i.e.,
Hawking radiation itself. However, we were mainly inter-
ested in physical effects of the modiﬁcations of the metricbrought about by Hawking radiation. For most of the time a
black hole exists, Hawking radiation is a small effect. The
metric at some distance from the horizon will essentially bethe Schwarzschild metric, i.e., r
schanges so slowly that the
second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (19) is negligible
and it also does not really matter whether the argument of
the ﬁrst term is the advanced time v, the retarded time u,or
even the Schwarzschild time t.
This is no longer true near the end of the black hole’s life,
because then Hawking radiation becomes a strong effect and
even may dominate the metric. We must then model it more
accurately in the whole spacetime. It is therefore concludedthat results (not discussed here), such as net repulsion after
full evaporation39are an artifact of the ingoing Vaidya met-
ric in most cases. This effect is not likely to occur for a black
hole at the end of its life.
A more sophisticated approach properly reproducing the
(future-directed) outﬂow of positive energy far from thehorizon would be to keep the ingoing Vaidya metric for radii
up to a small multiple of r
sand use an outgoing Vaidya met-
ric for larger r.13There would be matching conditions for the
places where the two metrics meet. Realizing this approach
might be a bit too involved for the classroom, and it would
not provide any quantitative gains for the description of real-
istic astrophysical black holes.
The properties of evaporating black holes obtained within
our model and discussed here should be robust against modelvariations aiming at a generally more quantitative descrip-
tion. Two of these are pretty intuitive. The ﬁrst is that, for
particles falling toward the black hole sufﬁciently long
before evaporation, there is no problem crossing the horizon.
Hawking radiation does not prevent them from falling in.This would be expected from a comparison of the time scales
on which Hawking radiation becomes relevant to those for
an infaller to cross the horizon, if a time coordinate is usedthat does not become singular at the horizon. Second, the
nature of the horizon changes. The event horizon of the sta-
tionary limit of the Vaidya metric (which is the correspond-
ing EF metric) turns into an apparent horizon. That is, it
remains a trapped null surface, but light may eventuallyescape from it due to its shrinking in time. Contrary to the
apparent horizons of growing black holes (the normal case),
this apparent horizon is outside of the event horizon, obvi-
ously because the standard condition of a positive energy
density everywhere is violated.
Moreover, it is expected that a counterintuitive aspect
found here will prevail in a generally more quantitative
description, viz., the strong repulsion experienced by a parti-
cle released from rest just above the horizon. Such a particlemay escape to inﬁnity, and this effect, predicted from the
Vaidya metric (but also from a time-dependent generaliza-
tion of the GP metric
7), is likely to be a qualitatively correct
result. Once the particle has been accelerated to nearly the
speed of light in a thin shell above the horizon, it will also
escape in a model, where the outer part of the metric has
been changed into something more realistic. Because this
outer metric will not contain a second horizon, anyrelativistic particle should not have problems escaping, just
as a light ray would.
Arguably, the effect is not so counterintuitive after
all, because of the presence of negative energy density.Repulsion in the Reissner–Nordstr €om metric is explicable
because of negative pressure (which is stress)
3exerted by the
electric ﬁeld. In the equations of motion, an electrostaticpotential term appears, representing negative energy. This
then suggests that it is the negative energy density in both
the Reissner–Nordstr €om solution and the Vaidya metric that
is responsible for the appearance of repulsion. A difference,however, is that the electrostatic energy term in theReissner–Nordstr €om geodesic equations exceeds the mass
energy of the black hole inside the inner horizon. By con-trast, a volume integral of the negative energy density of theVaidya metric, constructed to represent an evaporating blackhole, will be much smaller than the remaining mass energyof the black hole for all times except very brieﬂy beforecomplete evaporation. Moreover, the repulsion will happen
only for particles almost coordinate stationary near the hori-
zon. An infalling particle having already acquired a substan-tial inward velocity at the horizon will not experiencerepulsion ( _vremains ﬁnite at r¼r
sin(18)for_r<0). In the
Reissner–Nordstr €om case, the repulsion is velocity indepen-
dent. These considerations suggest that the presence of nega-tive energy density alone does not explain the repulsioneffect in the case considered here, although it may be a nec-essary condition for radial repulsion.
On the other hand, there is no need to invoke energy con-
siderations at all to understand repulsion the way we pre-
sented it in discussing Fig. 5. If the apparent horizon is
receding, no matter what the reason, then a coordinate sta-
tionary particle close enough to it will have essentially thespeed of outgoing light relative to the inﬂowing space in theriver model of a black hole.
41Such a relativistic particle will
be ejected and is likely to escape from the black hole. In thisview, the repulsion is not due to a repelling force but ratheran inertial effect. By contrast, a particle that has a sufﬁ-ciently large inward velocity slightly outside the horizon ismuch slower than light with respect to the inﬂowing spaceand thus will not be able to avoid being captured.
Finally, the system considered here seems to be the sim-
plest one exhibiting radial gravitational repulsion outside ahorizon. In principle, our prediction of particles being
ejected violently from near the horizon could be tested in a
sonic black hole analog,
25setup with a receding horizon.
1K. Schwarzschild, “ €Uber das Gravitationsfeld eines Massenpunktes nach
der Einsteinschen Theorie,” Sitzungsber. K €oniglich-Preußischen Akad.
Wiss. 1916 , 189–196; S. Antoci and A. Loinger, “On the gravitational ﬁeld
of a mass point according to Einstein’s theory,” e-print arXiv:physics/
9905030v1 (English translation).
2J. Droste, “The ﬁeld of a single centre in Einstein’s theory of gravitation,
and the motion of a particle in that ﬁeld,” Ned. Acad. Wet., SA 19,
197–215 (1917) http://www.jp-petit.org/papers/cosmo/1916-Droste.pdf .
3Ø. Grøn, “Poincar /C19e stress and the Reissner-Nordstr €om repulsion,” Gen.
Relativ. Gravitation 20, 123–129 (1986).
4P. C. Vaidya, “The gravitational ﬁeld of a radiating star,” Proc. Indian
Acad. Sci.-Sect. A 33, 264–276 (1951).
5A. Einstein and N. Rosen, “On gravitational waves,” J. Franklin Inst. 223,
43–54 (1937).
6A. Aste and D. Trautmann, “Radial fall of a test particle onto an evaporat-ing black hole,” Can. J. Phys. 83, 1001–1006 (2005).
7K. Kassner, “Radially falling test particle approaching an evaporating
black hole,” Can. J. Phys. 97, 267–276 (2019).
45 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 J. Piesnack and K. Kassner 45 04 October 2023 22:59:49
8P. Painlev /C19e, “La m /C19ecanique classique et la th /C19eorie de la relativit /C19e,” C. R.
Acad. Sci. 173, 677–680 (1921).
9A. Gullstrand, “Allgemeine L €osung des statischen Eink €orperproblems in
der Einsteinschen Gravitationstheorie,” Arkiv. Mat. Astron. Fys. 16, 1–15
(1922).
10A. S. Eddington, “A comparison of Whitehead’s and Einstein’s formulæ,”Nature 113, 192 (1924).
11D. Finkelstein, “Past-future asymmetry of the gravitational ﬁeld of a point
particle,” Phys. Rev. 110, 965–967 (1958).
12W. A. Hiscock, “Models of evaporating black holes. I,” Phys. Rev. D 23,
2813–2822 (1981).
13W. A. Hiscock, “Models of evaporating black holes. II. Effects of the out-
going created radiation,” Phys. Rev. D 23, 2823–2827 (1981).
14S. A. Hayward, “Formation and evaporation of nonsingular black holes,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 031103 (2006).
15M. D. Kruskal, “Maximal extension of Schwarzschild metric,” Phys. Rev.
119, 1743–1745 (1960).
16G. Szekeres, “On the singularities of a Riemannian manifold,” Publ. Math.
Debrecen 7, 285–301 (1960).
17J. D. Bekenstein, “Black holes and entropy,” Phys. Rev. D 7, 2333–2346
(1973).
18J. D. Bekenstein, “Generalized second law of thermodynamics in black-hole physics,” Phys. Rev. D 9, 3292–3300 (1974).
19S. W. Hawking, “Black hole explosions?,” Nature 248, 30–31 (1974).
20S. W. Hawking, “Particle creation by black holes,” Commun. Math. Phys.
43, 199–220 (1975).
21R. Dey, S. Liberati, Z. Mirzaiyan, and D. Pranzetti, “Black hole quantum
atmosphere for freely falling observers,” Phys. Lett. B 797(1–7), 134828
(2019).
22M. K. Parikh and F. Wilczek, “Hawking radiation as tunneling,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 85, 5042–5045 (2000).
23U. H. Gerlach, “The mechanism of blackbody radiation from an incipient
black hole,” Phys. Rev. D 14, 1479–1508 (1976).
24M. Visser, “Essential and inessential features of Hawking radiation,” Int.
J. Mod. Phys. D 12, 649–661 (2003).
25W. G. Unruh, “Experimental black-hole evaporation?,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
46, 1351–1353 (1981).
26J. Steinhauer, “Observation of quantum Hawking radiation and its entan-
glement in an analogue black hole,” Nat. Phys. 12, 959–965 (2016).
27T. Mueller and F. Grave, “Catalogue of spacetimes,” e-print
arXiv:0904.4184v3 (2010).
28K. Kassner, “Why ghosts don’t touch: A tale of two adventurers falling
one after another into a black hole,” Eur. J. Phys. 38, 015605 (2017).29A coordinate is timelike (spacelike) if a hypersurface of constant value of
that coordinate is spacelike (timelike).
30The single event ðX;TÞ¼ð 0;0Þhas an inﬁnity of time coordinates t, just
as the pole of a sphere has an inﬁnity of uvalues in spherical coordinates.
31A. J. S. Hamilton, “Hawking radiation inside a Schwarzschild black hole,”
Gen. Relativ. Gravitation 50, 1–48 (2018).
32The representation is symbolical, because pair creation should, as noted
before, not be considered a pointlike event.
33However, since Ais at a larger rcoordinate than B, the radiation he sees
will be more strongly redshifted than that seen by B.
34D. Singleton and S. Wilburn, “Hawking radiation, Unruh radiation, and
the equivalence principle,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 081102 (2011).
35A freely falling observer is in a local inertial system, so local experiments
do not allow her to detect the black hole horizon on crossing it. If the hori-
zon is a condition for the Hawking radiation in an almost stationary space-
time, then a freely falling observer cannot see radiation from that horizon,
once she reaches it. Radiation from a distant horizon is not forbidden by
the equivalence principle, as demonstrated by the simple fact that anobserver at inﬁnity does observe the Hawking radiation. Reference 34
gives support to the validity of the equivalence principle at the horizon
only for certain accelerated observers, by showing that Hawking radiation
and Unruh radiation have the same temperature for them. Note that the cal-
culation of a non-zero Hawking temperature in Ref. 31for a freely falling
observer passing the horizon is insufﬁcient to prove observability of the
radiation. What has to be proven in addition is that its intensity (or itsgray-body factor) is non-zero.
36T. Opatrn /C19y and L. Richterek, “Black hole heat engine,” Am. J. Phys. 80,
66–71 (2012).
37P. C. W. Davies, S. A. Fulling, and W. G. Unruh, “Energy-momentum ten-sor near an evaporating black hole,” Phys. Rev. D 13, 2720–2723 (1976).
38Interested readers can ﬁnd them in an earlier version of this article, depos-
ited on arXiv:2103.08340v2 [gr-qc].
39J. Piesnack, “Freier Fall von Testteilchen im Gravitationsfeld verdamp-
fender Schwarzer L €ocher,” Bachelor thesis (Otto-von-Guericke
Universit €at Magdeburg, 2020).
40The approximation rs/C28rmay be directly applied in (23) to obtain the
approximate result for r01. It also implies rs;v/C28c, which has to be used in
the equation for r02, not satisfying rs/C28r02.
41A. J. S. Hamilton and J. P. Lisle, “The river model of black holes,” Am. J.
Phys. 76, 519–532 (2008).
42This is true for classical objects. For quantum tunneling, the speed of light
is not an insurmountable barrier.
43This holds for other metrics with a receding apparent horizon as well (Ref. 7).
46 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 1, January 2022 J. Piesnack and K. Kassner 46 04 October 2023 22:59:49
