
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkBOOK REVIEWS| MARCH 01 2022
The Forest of Physics 
The Forest of Physics. .  Travis  Norsen   386 386 pp.  Pig Pug Press ,  2021 . Price: $45 (hardcover). ISBN 978-1-7345280.
Todd T imberlake
Am. J. Phys.  90, 239–240 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0085604
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
The acoustic impedance of a layered forest floor
J Acoust Soc Am  (August 2005)
Modern forest pathological state of the walnut-fruit forests of Kyrgyzstan
AIP Conference Proceedings  (June 2023)
Use of fractional forest cover maps for detection of forest fires in the Brazilian Amazon
AIP Conference Proceedings  (October 2022) 04 October 2023 23:05:08
BOOK REVIEWS
The downloaded PDF for any Review in this section contains all the Reviews in this section.
Craig F. Bohren, Editor
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802; mailing address: P.O. Box 887, Boalsburg, PA 16827; bohren@meteo.psu.edu
Book review—The Forest of Physics. Travis Norsen.
386 pp. Pig Pug Press, 2021. Price: $45 (hardcover).ISBN 978-1-7345280. (Todd Timberlake, Reviewer.)
Introductory physics textbooks can offer a few different
perspectives on their subject matter. They can present physicsas an established and known set of theories that are useful for
solving problems of a practical nature. This perspective
emphasizes what one can DO with physics. Alternatively,textbooks can present physics as an established and known
set of theories that help us to understand the functioning of
the natural world in a deep way. Here, the emphasis is onhow physics makes sense of peculiar features of our world
that might otherwise seem surprising or counterintuitive.
Most textbooks in calculus-based introductory physics com-bine the practical and explanatory perspectives, perhaps lean-
ing one way or the other depending on whether the
anticipated audience consists of future engineers or futurephysicists. In The Forest of Physics , Travis Norsen uses a
novel approach that melds the explanatory perspective with a
historical approach. By incorporating historical details,
Norsen presents physics as a dynamic subject that grows andchanges in order to adapt to new observations, incorporate
new theoretical insights, and adjust to the ever-changing
goals of its practitioners.
Norsen incorporates a historical perspective by discussing
episodes in the history of physics that led to important new
insights in a roughly chronological order. He presentsphysics as a puzzle that, when pieced together, provides us
with an understanding of the natural world, and he shows
us how some key parts of that puzzle were assembled.Although the focus of the book is physics, not history,
Norsen does not neglect discussing, respectfully, alternative
approaches that were historically important but that are nowviewed as incorrect, nor does he ignore situations in which
there seemed to be no consistent way to put the puzzle pieces
together. This acknowledgment of the difﬁculty of solvingthe puzzle serves to highlight the impressive achievement of
those physicists who eventually found ways to put the pieces
together into a seemingly coherent picture.
Although the amount of historical content varies by chapter,
throughout the book Norsen emphasizes the way physics helps
us to make sense of the world. Even at the level of deriving asingle formula, Norsen engages readers in sense-making by
analyzing whether the result has the proper dimensions and
gives the expected behavior in certain limiting cases. Onehopes that students reading the text will follow Norsen’s exam-
ple in their own work.
The book opens with a preliminary chapter on measure-
ment and uncertainty that is one of the best discussions of
this topic I have seen at an introductory level. The ﬁrst major
unit of the book examines the development of Newtonianmechanics, focusing on the development of astronomy from
Ptolemy to Newton and showing how Newtonian mechanicscan explain astronomical systems (including systems of
many bodies).
The next section examines the development of the electro-
magnetic theory, beginning with early qualitative observa-
tions of electrical and magnetic phenomena and working up
to the modern theory of electric and magnetic ﬁelds as
described by Maxwell’s equations. Only then, in Chapter 8,
does Norsen introduce the concept of energy with a focus onhow energy is stored in the electric and magnetic ﬁelds
inside capacitors and inductors, which then leads into a chap-
ter on electromagnetic radiation. The ﬁnal section of the
book covers the development of atomic theory from early
observations about the properties of gases (Boyle’s law,etc.) and mass ratios in chemical reactions to the develop-
ment of kinetic theory and classical thermodynamics, fol-
lowed by a chapter on statistical physics that isexceptionally insightful. The book closes with a glimpse at
how the idea of energy quantization helped make sense of
the nuclear atom and explained unexpected results for the
speciﬁc heats of gases.
Each chapter includes several Questions, Exercises, and
Projects which, like most of the book, feel like what you
would ﬁnd in an upper-level physics text even though they
cover (advanced) introductory material. The Questions are
conceptual in nature and often surprisingly deep. Exercises
are more mathematical, but they usually involve derivingformulas rather than calculating numbers. Few plug-and-
chug problems will be found, and those that are present deal
with situations of practical, historical, or conceptual signiﬁ-cance. Projects are more work-intensive and involve data
analysis, computer simulation, extended exercises, or labo-
ratory experiments. The Projects are supplemented by
online material in the form of Jupyter notebooks that help to
guide students (and instructors!) through the necessarysteps.
The Forest of Physics is very well written, particularly for
a self-published book. The style is conversational, and onecan imagine that one is listening to Norsen deliver a clear
and engaging lecture. Indeed, the book may be a bit too
much like a classroom lecture, since it frequently includes
references to what will be done “next week” or what will be
“shown in class.” While these references are mostly a minorannoyance, some students may be put off when they are told
they will see some interesting result derived in class only to
ﬁnd out that their instructor has chosen a different path.
Historians of science may view Norsen’s historical content
as fairly shallow and would certainly bemoan the lack ofcitations (or even a bibliography!), but, as noted above,
Norsen’s goal is to teach historically conscious physics, not
the history of physics.
239 Am. J. Phys. 90(3), March 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 239 04 October 2023 23:05:08
The most pressing question about The Forest of Physics
is: Who will use it? Norsen wrote the book for an audience
of ﬁrst-year physics majors who have previously completed
two years of calculus-based AP physics. The book shouldwork well for that audience, but less experienced students
might struggle with the material and be left with signiﬁcant
gaps in their knowledge of introductory physics. Studentsneed some familiarity with Newtonian mechanics and
electromagnetism before tackling this book. Norsen assumes
that his readers are ﬂuent with the calculus of a singlevariable, as well as vector operations like the dot and cross
products. Several of the worked examples involve multiple
integrals, but Norsen makes clever use of symmetry argu-ments and sequences the examples such that only single
variable integration is needed in each case. More advanced
mathematical topics, such as vector calculus and differentialequations, are mentioned in the text but not really used.
The Forest of Physics provides a way to offer an engaging
one-semester introductory course to a select group of ﬁrst-year students with strong physics backgrounds that willextend and, most importantly, deepen their understanding of
introductory physics content. Such a course would not onlymotivate students to take more advanced courses, but wouldalso serve as a nice bridge to those courses. I would not havebeen ready for The Forest of Physics in my ﬁrst semester of
college, but I do wish I could have used the book immedi-ately after completing my introductory physics sequence.
The historical perspective really helps to show how scientists
took a bunch of scattered pieces and put them together intothe powerful and coherent construction we call physics. Or,to adopt Norsen’s own metaphor, the book can help studentssee how individual trees combine to form the forest that isphysics.
Todd Timberlake is a Professor of Physics and Astronomy
at Berry College. He conducts research in computational
quantum mechanics and is a contributor to the Open Source
Physics collection. He is a co-author of two books : Classical
Mechanics with Maxima and Finding Our Place in the Solar
System: The Scientific Story of the Copernican Revolution.
AJP Index to Advertisers
ALPHA Immersions Ad . ............................. Cover 2
AAPT Membership. ................................ Page 161
AAPT ComPADRE ................................ Page 163
AAPT Summer 2022 Meeting ........................ Page 164
AAPT Career Center ...................................T O C
240 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 3, March 2022 Todd Timberlake 240 04 October 2023 23:05:08
