
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkINSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS| FEBRUARY 01 2022
Theoretical and experimental examination of simple coaxial
photonic crystals for undergraduate teaching 
Xubo Guo  
 ; Yingying Liu ; Ying Chang ; Meihong Zhu ; Liuwan Zhang
Am. J. Phys.  90, 152–158 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0059320
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Non-radiative mid-range wireless power transfer: An experiment for senior physics undergraduates
Am. J. Phys.  (August 2018)
Long-range superluminal pulse propagation in a coaxial photonic crystal
Appl. Phys. Lett.  (January 2002)
Noise characterization and modeling of polysilicon emitter bipolar junction transistors at microwave
frequencies
AIP Conference Proceedings  (August 1993) 04 October 2023 23:02:34
INSTRUCTIONAL LABORATORIES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
The downloaded PDF for any Note in this section contains all the Notes in this section.
John Essick, Editor
Department of Physics, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202
Articles in this section deal with new ideas and techniques for instructional laboratory experiments, for
demonstrations, and for equipment that can be used in either. Although these facets of instruction alsoappear in regular articles, this section is for papers that primarily focus on equipment, materials, and
how they are used in instruction. Manuscripts should be submitted using the web-based system that can
be accessed via the American Journal of Physics home page, ajp.aapt.org, and will be forwarded to theIL&D editor for consideration.
Theoretical and experimental examination of simple coaxial photonic
crystals for undergraduate teaching
Xubo Guo,a)Yingying Liu,Ying Chang, Meihong Zhu, and Liuwan Zhang
Teaching Center for Experimental Physics, Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China
(Received 8 June 2021; accepted 30 September 2021)
A study implementing a coaxial photonic crystal with a simple structure composed of only one type
of coaxial cable is described. The coaxial photonic crystal consists of alternating sections of a single
cable and Nparallel cables, with impedances of ZHandZH=N, respectively. The high mismatch in
impedance at the interfaces enables access to a highly superluminal group velocity with few cables.
An easily realizable method is also presented to measure both the amplitude of transmission and the
phase of the crystal by using an oscilloscope and a function generator. The measurements werevalidated by an advanced vector network analyzer and matched the results of theoretical analysis
based on the transfer matrix method. The experiment only requires electronic components and
equipment that are typically used in undergraduate teaching laboratories.
#2022 Published under an
exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0059320
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, coaxial photonic crystals have been used
as crystal analogs to study a wide range of effects in atomicand photonic crystals, such as their band structures,1–4dis-
persion relations,1wave localization,1superluminal1,5–8and
slow group velocities,9and nonlinear properties.10A coaxial
photonic crystal generally consists of a number of unit cellsconnected in a row. Each unit cell with a half-wavelength(k=2) is comprised of two coaxial cables with different impe-
dances, but the same electrical length. Mismatches in imped-
ance at the interfaces cause the propagating wave to be
reﬂected by such a structure. The constructive interferenceof multiple reﬂections creates frequency bands at 2 mf
0with
maximal transmission, where mis a positive integer,
f0¼vu=k, and vuis the phase velocity of the electromag-
netic wave in the cables. On the other hand, destructive inter-ference creates band gaps with minimal transmission atð2m/C01Þf
0. Anomalous dispersion, where the effective
refractive index decreases with frequency, occurs within the
band gaps and generates superluminal group velocities. If adefect is introduced into the crystal, a transmission peakappears within the band gaps and leads to strong positive dis-persion and a slow group velocity.
Group velocities up to 3 c, that is, three times the speed of
light in vacuum, have been observed.
1,5The coaxial photonic
crystal presented in Ref. 1consists of 24 5-m-long cables,
with alternating sections of RG58 (50 X) and RG59 (75 X)cables. Their total length is 120 m. A higher mismatch in
impedance allows for a higher, and even negative, groupvelocity.6,7The crystal in Ref. 6uses 17 alternating sections
of RG58 (50 X) cables, each of which is 6.19 m long, and
RG62 (93 X) cables, each of which is 7.97 m long, giving a
total length of 119.5 m. A negative group velocity of /C01.2c
has been observed, which contradicts theoretical analysis, inwhich negative group velocities should not be observed in a
linear, passive photonic crystal.11,12
The measurement of the overall phase shift through a
coaxial photonic crystal is essential for obtaining its effectiverefractive index and group velocity. However, the phase isobtained either by calculation
1or by ﬁrst recording the infor-
mation in the time domain of a pulse with an oscilloscopeand then taking its Fourier transforms.7To the best of our
knowledge, a method to directly measure the phase of acoaxial crystal with an oscilloscope and a function generatorhas not been proposed in the literature.
This study implements a simple coaxial photonic crystal
with only one type of cable. The coaxial photonic crystal iscomprised of alternating sections of a single coaxial cableandNparallel coaxial cables, which causes a high mismatch
in impedance and yields a remarkable superluminal effect.
Furthermore, the phase of the crystal is directly measuredwith an oscilloscope and a function generator. The measuredresults are validated by a precise vector network analyzer(VNA), which can accurately and quickly measure both theamplitudes and phase properties of electrical circuits using
152 Am. J. Phys. 90(2), February 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 152 04 October 2023 23:02:34
swept-frequency test signals. The measured results also
agree well with theoretical results based on the transfermatrix method.
II. EXPERIMENTAL ARRANGEMENT
The proposed coaxial photonic crystal is shown in Fig. 1
and consisted of alternating sections of two parallel cables(low impedance, L) and a single cable (high impedance, H)
joined with coaxial BNC T connectors. The crystal used only
one type of coaxial cable, 5D-FB, which had a lower attenua-
tion coefﬁcient than RG-type cables, although the lattercould be used. Each cable was 5 m long, had a characteristicimpedance of 60.2 X, which was measured using the method
in Ref. 13, and a phase velocity of v
u¼0:795c. The entire
crystal had 3.5 unit cells, each comprised of two parallel
cables and a single cable, with a total length of 35 m.
The experimental arrangement for measuring both the
amplitude of transmission and the phase of the coaxial pho-tonic crystal is shown in Fig. 2. A dual-channel arbitrary
function generator (Tektronix AFG1062) with a frequency ofup to 60 MHz was used to generate sinusoidal or arbitrarywaveforms. A multi-channel digital oscilloscope (R&S
RTM3004) measured the amplitude and phase response of
the crystal. The requisite electronic components and equip-ment are available in most undergraduate laboratories.
The key features of the crystal and the experimental
arrangement are as follows:
(1) The attenuation coefﬁcient and phase velocity of the two
parallel cables were identical to those of the single cable,but with half the characteristic impedance, as calculated
later in Sec. IV A . We examined a sinusoidal waveform
applied to the inputs of the two parallel cables. Thewaveform propagated in each cable with the same atten-uation coefﬁcient and phase velocity as those in a singlecable. However, the magnitude of the total current wastwice as large as (and thus the impedance was half of)
that of a single cable. Consequently, the impedance of N
parallel cables was 1 =Nthat of a single cable.
(2) The high mismatch in impedance between adjacent sec-
tions of the crystal enabled high group velocities withfew cables.
(3) The lengths of the cables in the entire crystal needed to be as
close to one another as possible. The variation in the lengths
o ft h ec a b l e su s e di nt h i ss t u d yw a sl e s st h a n 60.15%.(4) The function generator has a feature whereby the wave-
forms, frequencies, and amplitudes of two channels can
be set to be identical, and their phases can be aligned.Thus, the waveforms of the two channels were synchro-
nized. A regular dual-channel generator and oscilloscope
could also be used, as long as the phase of the two chan-nels of the generator would be capable of being aligned.
(5) A 50- Xtermination was placed in parallel with the input
impedance of Ch1 of the oscilloscope in the upper part
of the circuit in Fig. 2(a), i.e., on the short coaxial cable
from Out1 of the generator to Ch1 of the oscilloscope, to
avoid back reﬂection. The input impedance of the chan-
nels of the oscilloscope was set to 1 M X[in parallel with
a 14-pF capacitance, as shown in Fig. 2(b)]. Therefore,
theoretically , only one incident wave was measured by
Ch1 of the oscilloscope.
(6) The lower part of the circuit in Fig. 2(a), from Out2 to
Ch2, was identical to the upper part except for the coax-ial photonic crystal. Thus, the phase difference between
the channels of the oscilloscope could be attributed to
the coaxial photonic crystal. This is a simple and directmethod of measuring the phase using an oscilloscope
and a generator.
(7) The theoretical amplitude and phase of the crystal were
calculated using the transfer matrix method. The detailedprocedure is presented in Sec. IV.
III. RESULTS
A. Band gap
Figure 3shows the measured and theoretical amplitudes
of transmission and phase of the entire crystal. The ampli-
tude of transmission, measured using a sinusoidal waveformwith the oscilloscope, is shown in Fig. 3(a). The amplitude
of transmission was the ratio between the amplitudes of Ch2
and Ch1 of the oscilloscope. The frequency sweep was
Fig. 1. Photograph of the coaxial photonic crystal, consisting of alternating
sections of two parallel cables and a single cable joined with coaxial BNC T
connectors. The entire crystal has 3.5 unit cells, each comprised of two par-
allel cables and a single cable. The coaxial photonic crystal has a total length
of 35 m and occupies an area of 0.9 /C20.5 m2.Fig. 2. (a) Experimental arrangement for measuring both the amplitude of
transmission and phase of the coaxial photonic crystal. (b) Schematic of the
circuits in the dashed rectangles in (a). The 50- Xtermination is placed in
parallel with the input impedance of the oscilloscope.
153 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Guo et al. 153 04 October 2023 23:02:34
performed manually, and the frequency interval was
0.5 MHz (a 1-MHz interval was also suitable). A band gap
was observed between 9 and 15 MHz. Because the transmis-sion was weak at frequencies inside the band gap, the wave-
form of the oscilloscope was averaged over 2000 trials to
achieve a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). The theoreticalresults were calculated using the transfer matrix method (see
Sec. IV). A Keysight E5063A VNA was used to measure the
amplitude of transmission and phase of the crystal. Thisallowed for highly accurate measurements and was used tovalidate the measurements of the oscilloscope as well as the
theoretical results. The former results agreed well with the
latter, and both results were conﬁrmed by VNAmeasurements.
B. Dispersion relation, group velocity,
and superluminal effect
The dispersion relation was calculated from the phase data
using a theory based on the effective refractive index.
11,12
According to the theory, the total phase shift uthrough a
crystal with a total length of Lcan be ascribed to an overall
effective refractive index n, even though the crystal is
inhomogeneous,
nxðÞ¼/C0cu
xL: (1)
Note that the measured and calculated phases uwere
between /C0pandp. However, the original phases should
have decreased with the frequency. Thus, 2 pneeded to be
subtracted from the phase shift in every cycle to reconstructthe original phase.
Figure 4(a) shows the effective refractive indices of the
entire crystal, which were calculated using Eq. (1)from the
corresponding phase data. The experimental and theoreticaleffective refractive indices were in good agreement, and
decreased with frequency between 9 and 15 MHz, indicating
anomalous dispersion.The relationship between the group velocity v
gand the
effective refractive index nwas derived as1
vg¼c
nxðÞþxdn=dx; (2)
where xis the angular frequency. Figure 4(b) shows the
experimental and theoretical group velocities calculated
using Eq. (2)and the corresponding effective refractive indi-
ces. In addition, Fig. 4(b) shows the group velocity obtained
by measuring the transmission time of a pulse envelope withthe oscilloscope and the generator. The transmission time of
the pulse was also measured using the circuit diagram shown
in Fig. 2(a). The pulse envelope depicted in Fig. 5(a)Fig. 3. Measured and theoretical amplitudes of transmission (a) and phases
(b) of the crystal.Fig. 4. Experimental and theoretical effective refractive indices n(a) and
group velocities (b) of the entire crystal.
Fig. 5. Pulses recorded with the oscilloscope at a central band gap frequencyof 12 MHz. (a) Input pulse, (b) pulse propagating through the crystal, and (c)
pulse propagating through the crystal with a defect, discussed in Sec. III C.
154 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Guo et al. 154 04 October 2023 23:02:34
contained 25 cycles of waveforms of a sinusoidal carrier and
was sinusoidal in shape. The waveform of the pulse was cre-
ated using Tektronix ArbExpress software and copied to the
internal memory of the generator. The input pulse and thatpropagating through the crystal were recorded by the oscillo-scope, and the transmission time was determined through the
“center of mass” according to
t
cm¼ð
tEtðÞ/C12/C12/C12/C12dt
ð
EtðÞ/C12/C12/C12/C12dt; (3)
where EtðÞis the amplitude of the waveform of the pulse.1
As shown in Fig. 4(b), the theoretical group velocity
matched well with the VNA measurements. The maximum
group velocity was approximately 2.1 c, indicating a superlu-
minal effect. The superluminal effect does not violatethe principle of causality; experiments have shown that the
speed of information transmission cannot exceed c.14
The group velocities obtained from the measured phase of
the oscilloscope and the transmission time of the pulse were
consistent with those obtained by theory outside the band
gap. However, they deviated from the theoretical results by60:3cinside the band gap. Similar deviations have been
reported in past work.1,5An RTM3004 oscilloscope enables
a statistic evaluation and can provide the standard deviations
of the measured phase, ru. The waveform of the oscilloscope
was averaged over 2000 trials to achieve a stable ru.A s
might be expected, the greater the number of trials being
averaged, the stabler the ruwould be.15The standard devia-
tions of the group velocity, rvg, which were attributed mainly
toru, were calculated using the following equation:16
rvg/C25ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
@vg
@uNruN/C18/C192
þ@vg
@uNþ1ruNþ1/C18/C192s
/C25v2
gc
Df/C1Lﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
r2
uNþr2
uNþ1q
; (4)
where uNanduNþ1are the two phases used to calculate the
group velocity vg,ruNandruNþ1are the standard deviations
of the two phases, Df¼0.5 MHz is the frequency interval of
the measurements, and L¼35 m is the length of the coaxial
photonic crystal. Though ruis quite small, with an average
value of 0.32/C14and a maximum value of 0.76/C14, the standard
deviation of the group velocity, rvg, is relatively large, with
an average value of 0.15 cand a maximum value of 0.79 c,
as shown by the error bars in Fig. 4(b). This is mainly due to
the derivation of the effective refractive index n(which is
proportional to u) with respect to frequency in the denomi-
nator of Eq. (2), introducing a potential source of signiﬁcant
error.
C. Defect and slow group velocity
A defect was introduced into the coaxial photonic crystal
by doubling the length of the middle coaxial cable in Fig. 1.
Thus, the total length of the crystal with the defect was 40 m.A narrow transmission peak was created at 12 MHz withinthe band gap due to the defect, as shown in Fig. 6(a).A
strong normal dispersion with a positive and relatively high
dn=dxvalue occurred around the transmission peak between11.5 and 12.5 MHz, as shown in Fig. 6(c). This resulted in a
slow group velocity of 0.34 cat the transmission peak of
12 MHz, as shown in Fig. 6(d).
Figure 5depicts three pulses at the same frequency of
12 MHz: the input pulse, the pulse propagating with maximal
group velocity through the crystal without a defect, and thepulse propagating with minimal group velocity through the
crystal with a defect. The amplitudes of the pulses were
recorded by the oscilloscope.
D. Coaxial photonic crystal with three parallel cables
By changing the two parallel cables in Fig. 1to three par-
allel cables, the impedance of the low-impedance sections in
the crystal was reduced from half to one-third of that of thesingle cable. Thus, a higher mismatch in impedance was
achieved. The coaxial BNC T connectors were replaced by
BNC four-way connectors. The measured and theoreticalamplitudes of transmission and phase of the crystal with
three parallel cables are shown in Figs. 7(a) and7(b), respec-
tively. The amplitudes of transmission at frequencies inside
the band gap were lower than those of the crystal in Sec.
III A , and the band gap was wider owing to the higher mis-
match in impedance.
Figure 7(d) depicts the experimental and theoretical group
velocities. The theoretical results matched well with the
VNA measurements. The maximum group velocity wasapproximately 3.9 c. However, the measurements obtained
using the oscilloscope and the pulse method deviated consid-
erably from the theoretical results and those of the VNA
measurements. This deviation occurred in the band gap
between 8 and 16 MHz, and notably, a negative group veloc-ity of /C03.9cwas obtained from the measured phase of the
oscilloscope. Reference 11has shown that, for a lossless
model, negative group velocities are impossible. Severalproblems arose with phase measurement when using an
oscilloscope. First, waveforms at frequencies inside the band
gap, with a small amplitude of transmission, were distorted,meaning the measured phase might have been incorrect.
Second, the theoretical phase and the measured phaseFig. 6. Measured and theoretical amplitudes of transmission (a) and phase
(b), effective refractive indices (c), and group velocities (d) of the crystal
with a defect.
155 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Guo et al. 155 04 October 2023 23:02:34
obtained using the VNA decreased monotonically with fre-
quency, except for the 6pphase jump. However, the theoreti-
cal phase and the measured phase obtained using theoscilloscope did not, as shown in the dashed rectangle in
Fig. 7(b). Incorrect phase measurement introduced errors to
the data that could be attributed to the unusually large andnegative group velocity. On the other hand, as the VNA pro-
vided highly accurate results that matched well with the theo-
retical results, these were reliable. Third, in the denominatorof Eq. (2), the derivation of the effective refractive index
(which is proportional to the phase) with respect to the fre-
quency introduced signiﬁcant error. The measured standarddeviation of phase, r
u, remained quite small, with an average
value of 0.25/C14and a maximum of 0.88/C14. However, the maxi-
mum standard deviations of the group velocity, rvg,w e r ea s
large as 25.1 c, as shown by the error bars in Fig. 7(d).F o u r t h ,
the function generator suffered from loading effects, and the
amplitude of its output increased slightly with frequency. This
indicated that the upper circuit of Fig. 2(a) might not have
been matched well and that slight back reﬂection occurred.
The minimum group velocity after introducing a defect
into the crystal was 0.17 caccording to the theoretical results
and VNA measurements.
IV. THEORY
A. Characteristics of parallel coaxial cables
LetaH,bH,cH,a n d ZHbe the attenuation coefﬁcient, phase
constant, propagation constant, and characteristic impedance
of a single cable, respectively, where cH¼aHþibH.T h e
attenuation coefﬁcient aHis generally not constant, and is
dependent on frequency f,
aH¼1:035/C210/C06ﬃﬃ ﬃ
fp
: (5)
Equation (5)was obtained by ﬁtting the measured attenua-
tion coefﬁcient for a 40-m length plain cable in the
0–25 MHz frequency range.13We now consider the characteristics of two coaxial cables
connected in parallel. Figure 8(a)shows an equivalent circuit
model for a single coaxial cable, where RH,LH,CH, and GH
are the resistance, inductance, capacitance, and conductance
per unit length, respectively. The propagation constant andcharacteristic impedance of a single cable are
c
H¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
RHþixLH ðÞ GHþixCH ðÞq
; (6)
ZH¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
RHþixLH
GHþixCHr
: (7)
If two identical coaxial cables are combined in parallel, a
waveform propagates in each cable with an attenuation coef-
ﬁcient and phase velocity identical to those of a single cable.
Consequently, the amplitudes and phases of the signals at agiven position, z, in the two cables are the same. As a result,
two corresponding segments, Dz, of the two cables can be
placed in parallel without interfering with signal propaga-tion. Figure 8(b) shows two parallel-connected coaxial
cables with a short length Dz. If we connect equal potential
points, as shown by the two blue dotted lines, the parametersof the two parallel cables can be obtained such thatR
L¼RH=2, LL¼LH=2, CL¼2CH, and GL¼2GH.
Therefore, cL¼cHandZL¼ZH=2.
B. Transfer matrix for a section of coaxial cable
According to the transmission line equations, the solutions
for wave equations in a coaxial cable with impedance Z0and
propagation constant care
~VzðÞ¼Vþ
0e/C0czþV/C0
0ecz; (8)
~IzðÞ¼Vþ
0
Z0e/C0cz/C0V/C0
0
Z0ecz; (9)
where Vþ
0e/C0czandV/C0
0eczrepresent the forward and backward
components of the wave, respectively.Fig. 8. Equivalent circuit models for a single coaxial cable (a) and for two
parallel-connected coaxial cables with a short length Dz (b).Fig. 7. Measured and theoretical amplitudes of transmission (a) and phase
(b), effective refractive indices (c), and group velocities (d) of the crystal
with three parallel cables. There is a negative group velocity of /C03:9cat
12.25 MHz, which is not shown in (d) because a log2 scale is used for the
vertical axis and thus cannot show negative values.
156 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Guo et al. 156 04 October 2023 23:02:34
The transfer matrix method is convenient for dealing with a
system containing a series of components that interact only with
adjacent components. Suppose that for a section of cable of
length l, the voltage and current at z¼0a r e ~V1and~I1,a n da t
z¼lare~V2and~I2. Using Eqs. (8)and(9), we obtain
~V1
~I1"#
¼AB
CD"#
~V2
~I2"#
; (10)
where
AB
CD"#
¼cosh clðÞ Z0sinhclðÞ
sinhclðÞ=Z0cosh clðÞ"#
: (11)
C. Total transfer matrix for a coaxial photonic crystal
The total transfer matrix for a coaxial photonic crystal
consisting of a series of coaxial cables can be obtained bythe multiplication of the matrix for each cable,
A
TBT
CTDT"#
¼A1B1
C1D1"#
A2B2
C2D2"#
/C1/C1/C1AnBn
CnDn"#
:
(12)
The length of the BNC T and four-way connectors is approx-
imately 2.6 cm, which is quite short compared with that of
the 5-m coaxial cables. Thus, the connectors are neglected inthe theoretical calculations.
D. Amplitude and phase of transmission
Suppose the crystal is connected to, and is in between, a
source and a load, as shown in Fig. 9. The electromotive
force and internal impedance of the source are ~eand Z
e,
respectively. The impedance of the load is ZL. The voltage
and current at the input of the crystal are ~Vinand~Iin, and the
voltage and current at the end of the crystal are ~VLand~IL,
respectively. We then have
~Vin
~Iin"#
¼ATBT
CTDT"#
~VL
~IL"#
; (13)
~VL¼~ILZL; (14)
~e¼~Vinþ~IinZe: (15)
The transmittance tcan be obtained as the ratio of the volt-
age at the end of the crystal, ~VL, to the maximum output
voltage of the source, which is ~e=2 when it is matched.
Therefore,t¼~VL
~e=2¼2
ATþBT
ZLþCTZeþDTZe
ZL: (16)
The transmittance tis a complex number, and its amplitude
and phase can be calculated. The theoretical results of the
crystal as a function of frequency can easily be calculated
using a computer program.
V. CONCLUSION
A simple and effective coaxial photonic crystal structure
was constructed, with alternating sections of a single cable
and two or three parallel cables. This led to a high mismatchin impedance at the interfaces and helped achieve a superlu-minal group velocity of 3.9 cand a slow group velocity of
0.17 cwith few cables. The amplitude of transmission and
the phase of the crystal were measured with an oscilloscopeand a function generator. The measurements were veriﬁedby a VNA and theoretical calculations, where the latter were
based on the transfer matrix method. The veriﬁcation showed
that measurements of phase with the oscilloscope may beincorrect when the mismatch in impedance in the crystal andthe group velocity is high. Therefore, we suggest that mea-
surements of the coaxial photonic crystal with an oscillo-
scope should be veriﬁed by either theoretical calculations orVNA measurements.
The above experiments have been conducted for two years
in General Physics Laboratory courses for grade-two under-
graduate students majoring in physics. Coaxial photoniccrystals with two parallel cables are used in teaching experi-ments. Twenty-one sets of equipment were constructed in
our teaching lab. Because the generator and oscilloscope
were already available, the price of one set of equipment,comprising 12 cables ($12 each), two 50- Xterminators ($5
each), and ten coaxial BNC T connectors ($0.3 each), as
only about $157. If a dual-channel function generator is not
available, a low-cost UNI-T UTG932 generator operating upto 30 MHz ($139) is an option, in which the relative phasescan be adjusted. Moreover, a low-cost VNA VNWA 3SE
(<$700) performs well in the MHz range.
17Over 220 stu-
dents performed the measurements and calculations detailedin Secs. III A–III C (excluding the VNA measurements,
because these were used only to verify the measurements of
the oscilloscope and calculations). The students were
impressed by three aspects. First, the counterintuitive super-luminal effect was observable using conventional teachingequipment and components. Second, the transmittance of the
entire crystal could be conveniently calculated based on the
transfer matrix method. Third, the measurements were ingood agreement with the calculations.
Experiments could be conducted remotely during the
coronavirus disease (COVID)-19 pandemic if students had
suitable applications on their laptops, with virtual compo-
nents (transmission lines, resistors, and adaptors) and virtualelectronics equipment (oscilloscopes and function genera-tors).
18Students could choose components to build a circuit,
and simulations of the circuit could be run on virtual elec-
tronic equipment. On the other hand, real experiments couldbe conducted remotely, if the apparatus was accessed andcontrolled by students through the internet.
19,20
Experiments on a coaxial photonic crystal require only elec-
tronic components and equipment that are typically available Fig. 9. Equivalent circuit for solving for the transmittance of the crystal.
157 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Guo et al. 157 04 October 2023 23:02:34
in undergraduate laboratories. Such experiments are thus use-
ful for physics and engineering students to explore various
phenomena in one-dimensional photonic crystals.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Laboratory Innovation
Fund of Tsinghua University (Grant No. 4-11) and the Top-Notch Student Cultivation Program 2.0 of Ministry of
Education of China (Grant No. 20211007).
a)Electronic mail: guoxb@tsinghua.edu.cn, ORCID: 0000-0002-2150-
0800.
1A. Hach /C19e and A. Slimani, “A model coaxial photonic crystal for studying
band structures, dispersion, ﬁeld localization, and superluminal effects,”
Am. J. Phys. 72, 916–921 (2004).
2M. del Mar S /C19anchez-L /C19opez, J. A. Davis, and K. Crabtree, “Coaxial cable
analogs of multilayer dielectric optical coatings,” Am. J. Phys. 71,
1314–1319 (2003).
3A. Perrier, Y. Guilloit, /C19E. Le Cren, and Y. Dumeige, “A simple model sys-
tem to study coupled photonic crystal microcavities,” Am. J. Phys. 89,
538–545 (2021).
4G. J. Schneider, S. Hanna, J. L. Davis, and G. H. Watson, “Defect modes
in coaxial photonic crystals,” J. Appl. Phys. 90, 2642–2649 (2001).
5A. Hach /C19e and L. Poirier, “Long-range superluminal pulse propagation in a
coaxial photonic crystal,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 518–520 (2002).
6J. N. Munday and W. M. Robertson, “Negative group velocity pulse
tunneling through a coaxial photonic crystal,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 81,
2127–2129 (2002).
7J. N. Munday and W. M. Robertson, “Observation of negative groupdelays within a coaxial photonic crystal using an impulse response meth-od,” Opt. Commun. 273, 32–36 (2007).8A. Hach /C19e and L. Poirier, “Anomalous dispersion and superluminal group
velocity in a coaxial photonic crystal: Theory and experiment,” Phys. Rev.
E65, 036608 (2002).
9J. N. Munday and W. M. Robertson, “Slow electromagnetic pulse propaga-
tion through a narrow transmission band in a coaxial photonic crystal,”
Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 1053–1055 (2003).
10L. Poirier and A. Hach /C19e, “Nonlinear coaxial photonic crystal,” Appl. Phys.
Lett.78, 2626–2628 (2001).
11G. D’Aguanno, M. Centini, M. Scalora, C. Sibila, M. J. Bloemer, C. M.
Bowden, J. W. Haus, and M. Bertolotti, “Group velocity, energy velocity,
and superluminal propagation in ﬁnite photonic band-gap structures,”Phys. Rev. E 63, 036610 (2001).
12M. Centini, C. Sibilia, M. Scalora, G. D’Aguanno, M. Bertolotti, M. J.
Bloemer, C. M. Bowden, and I. Nfedov, “Dispersive properties of ﬁnite,
one-dimensional photonic band gap structures: Applications to nonlinear
quadratic interactions,” Phys. Rev. E 60, 4891–4898 (1999).
13J. S. Bobowski, “Modeling and measuring the non-ideal characteristics of
transmission lines,” Am. J. Phys. 89, 96–104 (2021).
14M. D. Stenner, D. J. Gauthier, and M. A. Neifeld, “The speed of informa-
tion in a ‘fast-light’ optical medium,” Nature 425, 695–698 (2003).
15M. G. Natrella, “Estimation of mandr,” in Experimental Statistics (Dover
Publications, New York, 2005), Chap. 1, pp. 1-10–1-11.
16ISO/IEC Guide 98-3: 2008(E), Uncertainty of Measurement–Part 3:
Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement (GUM: 1995)
(ISO/IEC, Geneva, Switzerland, 2008), p. 19, Eq. (11).
17See <https://www.sdr-kits.net/VNWA-3SE-Models >for “DG8SAQ
VNWA 3SE Automatic 2 Port Models.”
18J. P. Gerval and Y. L. Ru, “VELab: A virtual lab for electronics virtualexperiments,” Adv. Technol. Learn. 3, 82–88 (2006).
19D. J. O’Brien, “A guide for incorporating e-teaching of physics in a post-
COVID world,” Am. J. Phys. 89, 403–412 (2021).
20A. K. Mohammed, H. E. El Zoghby, and M. M. Elmesalawy, “Remote
controlled laboratory experiments for engineering education in the post-
COVID-19 era: Concept and example,” in 2020 2nd Novel Intelligent and
Leading Emerging Sciences Conference (NILES), Giza, Egypt (IEEE,
2020), pp. 629–634.
158 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 2, February 2022 Guo et al. 158 04 October 2023 23:02:34
