
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| FEBRUARY 01 2023
Thermal infrared astronomy for the introductory laboratory 

Clifford W . Padgett ; William H. Baird ; J. Spencer Coile ; Wayne M. Johnson ; Erin N. Groneck ; Robert A. Rose
Am. J. Phys.  91, 122–131 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0081072 04 October 2023 22:49:32
Thermal infrared astronomy for the introductory laboratory
Clifford W. Padgett,1,a)William H. Baird,2,b)J. Spencer Coile,2Wayne M. Johnson,3
Erin N. Groneck,1and Robert A. Rosec)
1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Armstrong Campus, Georgia Southern University, 11935
Abercorn St, Savannah, Georgia 31219
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Armstrong Campus, Georgia Southern University, 11935 Abercorn
St., Savannah, Georgia 31419
3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Armstrong Campus, Georgia Southern University, 11935 Abercorn
St., Savannah, Georgia 31419
(Received 6 December 2021; accepted 20 November 2022)
We show that infrared telescopes can be constructed at low cost using consumer-grade thermal
infrared imagers and commercially available germanium lenses. Using these telescopes in the
laboratory, introductory astronomy students can image nearby celestial objects to observe
properties that are not seen in the visible region, in particular, variations in temperature across thesurface.
#2023 Published under an exclusive license by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0081072
I. INTRODUCTION
The far infrared portion of the spectrum enables the deter-
mination of the temperature of remote objects without hav-
ing to place a probe directly in contact with the object. This
is possible because the blackbody radiation curve of bodieshaving a temperature up to about 400 K peaks at a wave-
length of 7.2 lm, which is in the far infrared range.
The recent advent of inexpensive infrared (IR) cameras,
such as the Seek Compact Pro1and FLIR ONE,2provides
the opportunity to investigate this range of the electromag-
netic spectrum in introductory physics or astronomy labs.While thermal imagers were available for $2,000 in the early
2000s, devices in that price range typically used sensors of
120/C2120 pixels that could only record still images. Today,
a 320 /C2240-pixels imager with video capability can be pur-
chased for $400. The Seek Compact Pro camera is speciﬁed
as having a temperature range from /C040
/C14C to 330/C14C and
with a resolution of 0.1/C14C. It is sensitive to infrared radiation
wavelengths between 7.5 and 14 lm and has a ﬁxed IR lens
with a focal length of 6.6 mm. At this level of performance,
new possibilities for classroom use appear. These cameras
provide unique opportunities for classroom demonstrationsand laboratory activities and have been used in physics,3–7
chemistry,8–10and biology,11but, to our knowledge, they
have yet to be employed in general education astronomy
courses. While there is no shortage of applications for these
IR cameras, one that is readily feasible is their use in ama-teur astrophotography.
The beneﬁt of adding this new spectral window to
introductory astronomy courses is similar to its beneﬁt in
professional astronomy: the appearance of objects
changes in the different spectral regions, as can be seen
in NASA’s Solar Mission’s webpages for instance, givingcomplementary information on their composition and
characteristics.
12We contend that there is educational
value in a hands-on demonstration of this fact, but practi-cally speaking, most undergraduate students have access
to a limited range of wavelengths for astronomical
observations.
Many campuses may own or have access to visible-light
observatories or smaller portable telescopes; a smaller num-
ber may have a radio telescope. Coupling a commercial IRdetector to a telescope, therefore, helps students realize that
different spectral ranges tell different but complementary
stories.
In this paper, we show how a simple IR camera, connected
to a smartphone, can be placed at the observation point of a
telescope to give qualitative access to the IR appearance of
various celestial bodies.
Questions that can be sparked by the use of such IR tele-
scopes include: Why does Venus show phases in an ordinarytelescope but is always “full” in the IR? Why can one see
Mars through an IR telescope, but not Jupiter and Saturn?
Why does the Moon look so different in the IR compared tothe visible range, as is vividly illustrated during a lunareclipse? The contrast between the appearance of celestial
objects illuminated by the solar blackbody radiation and the
blackbody radiation they themselves emit opens the door todiscussions about some of the typical topics in an introduc-tory planetary astronomy course. For example, the ﬁrst
semester of a two-semester course in introductory astronomy
is typically concerned with basic physical principles of orbitsand the electromagnetic spectrum as applied to our solar sys-
tem. Aside from the Sun, nothing in our solar system produ-
ces visible light from its own blackbody radiation. Everyother object viewable with an inexpensive telescope reﬂectsthe Sun’s visible light but produces its own electromagnetic
radiation, primarily in the infrared. Telescopes, such as the
Hubble Space Telescope, which primarily detects visiblelight, excel at seeing distant stars, but the light reﬂected byextrasolar planets is typically dwarfed by the light emitted
by their primary stars. In this respect, the infrared region pro-
vides superior viewing opportunities since a planet’s radia-tion can be expected to peak in the IR while that of their hoststars does not.
After a short reminder of the types of visible telescopes
that are commonly employed in astronomy (Sec. II A), we
describe how these can be retroﬁtted to become IR tele-scopes (Sec. II B) using a compact commercial IR detector (a
Seek Compact Pro camera connected to an iPhone, unless
stated otherwise). An IR refractor telescope is used for anindoor laboratory veriﬁcation of the thin lens equation in theIR range (Sec. III). The construction of an IR reﬂector tele-
scope for astronomical observations is detailed in Sec. IV A.
Such a telescope can be used to observe the Moon
122 Am. J. Phys. 91(2), February 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 122 04 October 2023 22:49:32
or other celestial objects, and possible activities are detailed
in Sec. IV B.
II. VISIBLE AND IR TELESCOPES
A. Telescope types and use
There are several common telescope designs, but, in this
article, we will concentrate on two: the refractor and the
Newtonian reﬂector telescopes. Figure 1shows the optical
path of these two types of telescopes. In a telescope, the pri-
mary objective is the largest optical element, and, in the
designs shown, the ﬁrst one that incident light encounters. In arefractor (Fig. 1(a)), the primary objective is the front lens. In a
reﬂector (Fig. 1(b)), it is the large concave mirror. The diameter
of the primary objective, also known as the aperture, deter-mines the light gathering ability of the telescope. For these two
types of telescopes, the focal length of the telescope is deﬁned
as that of the primary objective. The longer the focal length ofthe primary objective, the higher the possible magniﬁcation.
The ratio of the focal length to the aperture diameter of a tele-
scope is called its f-ratio. A smaller f-ratio corresponds to abrighter image, making this parameter especially important forastrophotography. For visual astronomy, a second lens (called
the eyepiece) is needed to focus the light in a way that allows
the human eye to construct an image. The magniﬁcation Mis
determined from the ratio of the primary objective focal length
f
0to the eyepiece focal length fe,
M¼/C0fo
fe: (1)
The preferred design depends on the application and the
availability of the required optical components.
Figure 2shows two common optical conﬁgurations for astro-
photography. Figure 2(a)corresponds to the conﬁguration for
the afocal projection method, in which a camera, with its own
lens attached, is connected to the telescope behind the eyepiece
and replaces the human eye as the light detector. By construc-tion, the camera’s image sensor is placed at the image plane. In
the prime focus method (Fig. 2(b)), the telescope’s primary
objective is used as the camera lens. While prime focus meth-ods are simpler in principle, they require removing the camera
lens to allow for direct focusing of the image from the primary
objective onto the camera’s light detector, which makes themethod cumbersome.
B. Infrared telescopes
Infrared telescopes work similarly to optical telescopes. As
in optical telescopes, infrared telescopes use a combination oflenses and mirrors to gather and focus radiation onto a
detector. However, the change in wavelength imposes somenew constraints. Ordinary optical-grade glass, as found in
refracting telescopes and eyepiece lenses, is opaque to far
infrared radiation and, therefore, cannot be used for IRimaging. These lenses must be replaced by optical ele-ments, such as germanium lenses, that are transparent to theIR.
In addition to changing the optics, a thermal IR telescope
will need an IR detector, as the eye or standard cameras can-not image these wavelengths. A common thermal IR cameradesign is an array of uncooled infrared sensors known asmicrobolometers. Microbolometers consist of an IR absorb-
ing element, typically amorphous silicon or vanadium oxide,
which has a resistance that depends strongly on its tempera-ture, and which is thermally decoupled from the substrate.When IR radiation is incident on the device, its temperatureincreases, thus changing its electrical resistance. By measur-
ing the intensity of the IR radiation and assuming a black-
body curve with an adjustable emissivity e(by default
e¼0.97 in the Seek Compact Pro camera), the camera
assigns a temperature to an object.
For laboratory use, a refracting telescope may be easier to
construct, as small IR lenses of up to 40 mm in diameter can
be purchased for $300–$500 each. This is what we will pre-
sent in our ﬁrst laboratory activity. However, these lens sizesmean that an IR refracting telescope will have limited resolu-tion and light collection ability resulting in relatively modestperformance for outdoor observations. Moreover, mirrors
reﬂect both IR and visible light, so that adapting an ordinary
reﬂecting telescope is, in our opinion, the best option forthermal IR astronomy.
Thermal IR cameras, such as the Seek Compact Pro, typi-
cally have a ﬁxed exposure time. As a consequence, theyrequire fast optics with f-ratios of the order of f/1 to f/1.4 in
order to collect enough IR light to generate an image. Since
most reﬂecting telescopes have f-ratios around f/6, they areunsuited for a prime focus setup; however, the afocal projec-tion method on f/6 telescope can result in effective f-ratio of
less than f/2.
13Throughout the manuscript, we will use the
afocal projection method (see the supplementary material14
for more information about the prime focus method). Then,to permit imaging, the only change needed to the reﬂectingtelescope is to replace the glass eyepiece with a germanium
lens. This is the setup we have used for all outdoor observa-
tions. It should be noted that changing the f-ratio of the IRcamera will affect the reported temperature, as this willaffect the intensity of the IR light being received by thedetector for both prime focus and afocal projection, resulting
in large errors in the temperatures reported by the camera.
Fig. 1. Lens arrangements for (a) refracting telescope and (b) reﬂecting telescope.
123 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Padgett et al. 123 04 October 2023 22:49:32
They can be minimized by maintaining an effective f-ratio as
close as possible to the original IR camera lens.
The items used in our experiment and their approximate
cost are listed in Table Iof the supplementary material.14If
existing telescopes can be adapted, this can be implemented
for as little as $700, or, if $1200 is available, a new system
can be built using optimal components.
III. CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF AN INFRARED
REFRACTOR FOR THE LABORATORY
As an introduction to IR astronomy, we propose that stu-
dents construct a simple thermal IR refractor with which
they can measure the telescope’s magniﬁcation and observe
IR images of common objects.
In a general physics course, students often perform a labo-
ratory experiment investigating thin-lens optics in which
they calculate the magniﬁcation resulting from two converg-
ing lenses using the magniﬁcation equation for telescopes
given in Eq. (1). This equation is valid assuming the object
being observed is sufﬁciently far from the objective lens. If
we assume parallel light both entering and exiting the sys-
tem,15the two lenses should be placed a distance feþfofrom
one another. Adjustments from this initial conﬁguration canthen be made to best suit each user’s eyesight.
The theoretical magniﬁcation provided in Eq. (1)can be
improved upon by using Eq. (2), which is more appropriate
for the case when the object distance is not dramatically
larger than the focal length of the objective
16
M¼/C0f0
feD2
0
D0/C0f0 ðÞ2 !
; (2)
with D0being the distance between the objective lens of the
telescope and the object.
In this exercise, the IR refracting telescope can be made
out of two IR lenses positioned on an optical bench (Fig. 3),
approximately feþfofrom one another. Thermal images of
an object are captured both through the two lenses and fromthe same distance with the two lenses removed. The distance
between the object and the thermal camera is kept constant.The ratio of the image sizes was used to determine the
magniﬁcation.
Table Ishows the calculated and measured magniﬁcations
for various combinations of lenses arranged as a simple
refractor. Notice that although Eq. (2)is clearly a better
model for the true magniﬁcation of this system, the values
provided by the simpler Eq. (1)are typically within 5%–10%
of the values from Eq. (2)and the experimental results.
In addition to providing the opportunity for students to
experimentally verify the thin lens equation, this exercise
also illustrates that, although the laws of optics are the same
for visible and IR light, the obtained images can be strikingly
different. Figure 3demonstrates this for a neon tube in which
the lower ends, where the electrical contacts are located, are
signiﬁcantly hotter than the rest of the tubing. As a conse-
quence, these ends appear to be brighter in the IR image.Whether due to a real temperature difference or just a conse-
quence of the large difference in density between the metal
electrodes and the very low gas pressure inside the tube, the
contrast will no doubt catch the students’ attention. They can
qualitatively appreciate that different characteristics of an
object are apparent in different parts of the spectrum. They
can then understand why professional astronomers are also
interested in IR telescopes.
IV. CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF OUTDOOR
INFRARED REFLECTING TELESCOPE
A. Construction and limitations
As mentioned in Sec. II B, for astronomical observations,
a reﬂecting IR telescope is preferred. In this section, we pre-
sent a method for converting an optical reﬂecting telescope
into a thermal IR telescope capable of observing the Moon
and the terrestrial planets. Using a consumer-grade thermal
camera such as the Seek Compact Pro and a reﬂecting tele-
scope like the Orion SkyQuest XT8, it is possible to obtain
high-quality thermal images of distant objects via the afocal
Fig. 2. Lens arrangements for (a) photography using afocal projection and (b) prime focus photography. The arrangements are shown in the case of a refr acting
telescope.
Table I. Calculated and measured magniﬁcation of the refracting IR telescope.
Do(cm) f o(mm) f e(mm) Theoretical M given in Eq. (1) Theoretical M given in Eq. (2) Measured M (by counting pixels of the image)
123 35 15 2.33 2.47 2.53 60.07
123 25 15 1.67 1.74 1.78 60.05
123 35 25 1.40 1.48 1.53 60.05
243 35 15 2.33 2.40 2.45 60.08
243 25 15 1.67 1.70 1.74 60.07
243 35 25 1.40 1.44 1.44 60.06
124 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Padgett et al. 124 04 October 2023 22:49:32
projection photography method, in which the IR camera is
mounted after the telescope’s eyepiece.
Starting with an Orion SkyQuest XT8 telescope (f/5.9),
we replaced the eyepiece of the telescope with a plano-convex germanium lens. Uncoated germanium lenses aretransparent to IR radiation between 2 and 14 lm. However,
better performance is obtained from germanium lenses that
are coated to optimize transmission (anti-reﬂection coatings
AR or BBAR). In our setups, we used two different eyepie-ces.
17Eyepiece A is transparent in the 3–12 lm range and
eyepiece B in the 7–12 lm range. Their speciﬁcations are
given in Table II. The lenses were mounted using a custom
3D printed holder designed to keep the lens in a standard
thread-on 1.25 in. ﬁlter housing.18We used an Orion color
ﬁlter as a housing, removing the colored glass and replacingit with the germanium lens. This was then screwed into a
standard 1.25 in. telescope eyepiece barrel. Figure 4shows
these lenses in their holders along with other parts used.Note that lens B is smaller than lens A and required a differ-ent 3D printed holder. The choice between IR eyepieces Aand B is a matter of magniﬁcation. For the Orion XT8 tele-
scope shown in Fig. 4(a), eyepiece A provides 34.3 /C2magni-
ﬁcation whereas eyepiece B provides 96 /C2magniﬁcation, as
calculated using Eq. (1).
Regarding the IR detector, we used a Seek Compact Pro
camera attached to a smartphone. The camera has to be
aligned with the eyepiece. We found holding the cellphone
by hand at the correct distance from the eyepiece difﬁcult formost students (and professors). We, therefore, printed aneyepiece holder to ﬁt a Celestron NexYZ phone mount. It isdesigned to hold the cell phone at the correct distance from
the eyepiece for afocal projection and to enable the cell
phone to take pictures through the telescope. The adjustabil-ity of this device allowed excellent alignment of the thermalcamera and eyepiece and easier use of the system (Figs. 4(a)
and4(b)).The Seek Compact Pro’s microbolometer has a spectral
range of 7.5–14 lm. However, absorption by CO
2,H2O, and
O3in the Earth’s atmosphere reduces the usable window to
about 8–14 lm and diminishes the transmitted intensity even
in this window (Fig. 5). Note that this is a small but cumula-
tive effect as light travels through the atmosphere, and that it
only has a measurable impact when observing celestial
objects or objects at a great distance: the absorption-inducedreduction in transmission then means the temperature ofcelestial objects reported by the camera may be lower thanin reality, as the camera is effectively equating IR intensity
with temperature.
We have also observed that the object temperatures
reported by the camera seem to be affected by the tempera-ture of background objects, probably due to off-axis light, aswell as by the temperature of the camera itself.
19We would
like to emphasize that the camera nonetheless preserves the
hierarchy in the temperature of objects within the imager’sﬁeld of view: the hottest/coldest object appears brightest/dimmest. Additional errors are introduced when the IR cam-era is attached to a telescope due to the change in the effec-
tive f-ratio of the IR camera in this conﬁguration. For this
reason, IR imagers should be used to provide qualitativerather than quantitative data on the relative temperatures ofdifferent parts of a scene, see the supplementary material
14
for more discussion on this topic.
This limitation does not, however, diminish the utility of
the IR telescope in our opinion. Although the above-described custom-made IR telescope is of course not compa-rable to a research-grade infrared observatory, both provideimagery that is sufﬁciently different from their visible-light
counterparts to warrant interest. For example, as seen in
Figs. 6(a)and6(b), we could distinguish between active and
inactive electrical transformers using IR images, while theylook identical in visible light.
This IR telescope can be used to observe a limited number
of objects. The Moon is an obvious choice, and the next targets
would be the planets. The chief limitations of the thermalimager that we used in this experiment are its low-temperaturelimit of 233 K and its relatively small pixel count. All outerplanets have mean temperatures lower than 180 K: Jupiter is
about 160 K, Saturn 130 K, Uranus 80 K, and Neptune 70 K. IR
cameras such as the Seek Compact Pro have under 100,000pixels, a small fraction of the size of the megapixel camerasthat are found in even lower-tier smartphones. The camera can-
not detect stars, even with a 20 in. telescope, which is about the
largest commonly available commercial telescope size. This is
Fig. 3. IR refracting telescope exercise: (a) Object to be observed: neon tube. (b) Optical bench with IR lenses. (c) Thermal image of target through th e con-
structed IR refractor telescope; the grey scale is proportional to the temperature read by the IR camera.
Table II. Speciﬁcations for the germanium IR Eyepieces used in this work.
BBAR stands for broadband anti-reﬂective coating and AR for anti-reﬂective coating. Each consists of an anti-reﬂective treatment of the lens
using a thin dielectric layer. BBAR coatings are multiple layers of dielec-
trics, allowing for enhanced transmission.
Eyepiece Focal length Diameter Coating Holder
A 35 mm 25 mm BBAR (3–12 lm) 3D printed ﬁlter insert
B 15 mm 12.5 mm AR(7–12 lm) 3D printed ﬁlter insert
125 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Padgett et al. 125 04 October 2023 22:49:32
not surprising, as the thermal imager’s detection mechanism
relies on the amount of thermal energy received in each pixel.We can estimate the power received from stars other than theSun by assuming they emit as perfect blackbodies. Sirius A isthe brightest star in the night sky. At a distance of 8.6 lightyears from the Earth (8.1 /C210
16m) and a power output of 25
solar luminosities (or 9.6 /C21027W),21we calculate a radiation
intensity on Earth of
9:6/C21027W
4p8:1/C21016 ðÞ2¼1:2/C210/C07W
m2:
The total power received by a 2000diameter mirror is then
2.4/C210/C08W. To ﬁnd the fraction of that power emitted in
the camera’s detectable frequency range, we integratePlanck’s formula for spectral irradiance22
Ik¼2phc2
k51
ehc=kkT/C01/C20/C21
(3)
from k¼7.5–14 lm and divide the result by the integral of the
Planck formula across all wavelengths. In Eq. (3),Ikis the
spectral irradiance at wavelength kof a blackbody emitting at
temperature T. For a blackbody of temperature T ¼10,000 K,
w h i c hi st h et y p i c a lt e m p e r a t u r eo fs t a r ss u c ha sS i r i u sA ,o n l y2.8/C210/C04of the total power emitted is detectable by thecamera. The IR camera would need to be sensitive to power of
about 6.8 /C210/C012W( a s s u m e dt ob ef o c u s e dt oas i n g l ep i x e l )
to be able to detect this star, whereas we estimate the camera’s
detection limit to be 10/C08–10/C09W per pixel. As a consequence,
only the Moon and the inner planets deliver enough power tobe detected by this kind of telescope.
B. Results and discussion
1. Temperature profile of the Moon
The lunar surface temperature varies greatly throughout the
lunar day from /C24392 K at noon on the equator to /C2495 K just
before sunrise.
23In order to investigate this, we captured IR
images of the Moon using an 8 in. reﬂecting telescope (Fig. 7).
To improve the ﬁeld of view without sacriﬁcing resolution, it is
convenient to use an eyepiece with a smaller focal length and
“stitch” several higher-magniﬁcation images into a mosaicimage using software such as Microsoft Image Composite
Editor.
24An example of such a stitched image is shown in Fig.
7(a), where an IR image is produced by joining four images
taken through an 8 in. telescope with IR eyepiece B. Note that
the temperature given by the IR detector does not reﬂect
the actual lunar temperature, as mentioned earlier, but rather isa measure of the lunar radiation ﬂux arriving on the detector.Image quality can also be improved thr ough image “stacking,”
where multiple images are added to each other to form a
Fig. 4. (a) 8 in. Orion 8XT with equipment attached. Inset: zoom on the camera and eyepiece attachment assembly and (b): Celestron NexYZ phone holder,
Seek imager, germanium eyepieces, and eyepiece holders. Inset: zoom on the eyepiece assembly.
Fig. 5. Transmittance of the Earth’s atmosphere in the visible and IR range. The longer red horizontal bar shows the region of transparency of the germa nium
lens used and the shorter green horizontal bar is the range of wavelengths detectable by the IR imager (Ref. 20).
126 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Padgett et al. 126 04 October 2023 22:49:32
composite image. Figure 7(f)shows an image stacked from
about 100 images taken from a short video, using the Registack6 software package,
25demonstrating that a signiﬁcant increase
in detail can be obtained using this telescope-camera
combination.
Intensity proﬁles of the IR and visible images across the
lines indicated in Figs. 7(a)and7(b) are shown in Figs. 7(c)
and7(d). The difference in the proﬁles illustrates the differ-
ence in the nature of the sources of each kind of radiation;the IR image increases in intensity (temperature) smoothly
from the colder terminator (day-night line) to the hotter sub-
solar point on the Moon. In contrast, the proﬁle in the visibleimage shows nearly uniform illumination across the same
region of the Moon, as, in this case, visible light is merely
reﬂected from the Moon’s surface. It is also noticeable thatthe lunar maria appears brighter than the surrounding high-
lands in the IR image, as was observed by the Lunar
Reconnaissance Orbiter.
22This comes from their lower
albedo due to the lunar maria being composed primarily of
basalt, whereas the highlands are mainly composed of anor-
thosites. The Sun’s light is therefore absorbed more efﬁ-ciently in the maria, in much the same way as asphalt will behotter than cement under the noonday Sun.
In addition to variations in temperature due to the lunar sur-
face geology, variations due to the Sun’s altitude above the
lunar horizon are visible. In Fig. 7(c), the dashed line shows
the theoretical temperature proﬁle for the Moon using the
lunar insolation model
22developed from the Diviner Lunar
Radiometer (DLR) data from the Lunar ReconnaissanceOrbiter. The DLR observed the Moon in the IR range
(0.32–400 lm). This model is obtained by balancing the
incoming solar ﬂux and the radiative thermal emission
ThðÞ¼S1/C0AðÞ cosh=er/C2/C3
1=4; (4)
where Sis the solar constant, eis the average emissivity of
the lunar surface, ris the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, his
the solar angle from zenith, and Ais the lunar albedo which
is a function of the latitude22
AhðÞ¼A0þah=45/C14ðÞ3þbh=90/C14ðÞ8; (5)
where aand bare constants determined experimentally.
Following Ref. 22, we used S ¼1370 W/m2,A 0¼0.08,
a¼0.045, b¼0.14, and e¼0.95.The overall evolution of the lunar thermal emission is
similar to our measurements. In both cases, we see thehighest temperature at the sub-solar point, the coldestat the day-night terminator, and a continuous change
Fig. 7. Two images of the Moon taken minutes apart. (a) IR image, where
the brightness corresponds to the relative temperature (the temperature
scale, as read by the detector is given, but does not reﬂect the actual lunar
temperature—see the text). Note that the IR image reveals that the maria are
hotter than the highlands (b) Visible image. Image (a) was created from amosaic of four images taken using an 8 in. f/5.9 reﬂecting telescope, with IR
eyepiece B, using the afocal projection method. Image (b) was taken using a
24 mm eyepiece on the same telescope. Both images (a) and (b) used an
iPhone 8 for capture. (c) Solid red line: intensity proﬁle of image (a) taken
across the red line. Dashed blue line, the plot of Eq. (4). (d) Intensity proﬁle
of image (b) taken across the blue line. (e) Single IR image and (f) Result of
stacking approximately 100 IR images, showing noticeable improvement in
the level of detail. Temperature scale for (e) and (f) are the same as for (a).
Fig. 6. Images of an (active) electrical transformer taken by an iPhone 6 through an 8 in. f/5.9 reﬂecting telescope in visible light, 40 mm eyepiece (a) , and in
IR light using IR eyepiece A (b).
127 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Padgett et al. 127 04 October 2023 22:49:32
between the two extremes. We expect that the majority of
the disagreement between the measured proﬁle and the
model can be attributed to the camera’s previously men-
tioned unknown and non-trivial mapping between inten-sity and temperature. Moreover, the fact that the model
itself depends only on latitude (thereby averaging over the
Moon’s surface to provide azimuthal symmetry) also sug-gests we should not expect perfect agreement between itand a proﬁle drawn along any particular line of constant
azimuth.
2. Total lunar eclipse
A lunar eclipse presents a unique opportunity to observe the
Moon during a rapid change in insolation and to observe thatcertain lunar craters retain heat more than the average lunar sur-
face. Figure 8(a)shows an image taken when approximately
30% of the Moon was covered by the Earth’s umbra during thepartial lunar eclipse of November 19, 2021. Figure 8(b)shows
a visible-light image of the Moon taken at the same time; notethat it is difﬁcult to see in this image the part of the Moon inthe umbra, while in the IR image the entire Moon is still visible.Figure 8(c)shows a simulation of the Moon, in the visible light
range, at the same time as the images in Figs. 8(a)and8(b),t o
show where the shadow boundary exactly is. As can be seen inFig.8(a), several craters are warmer than the surrounding lunar
surface. We used the large crater Tycho to identify some of themore prominent features of the IR image and marked them ona visible-light image (Fig. 8(e)). The Midcourse Space
Experiment satellite (imaging the Moon in IR at 4.3 lm)
Fig. 8. (a) IR image taken using an 8 in. reﬂecting telescope, IR eyepiece A, a Seek Compact Pro thermal imager, and an iPad where approximately 400 image s
were stacked and enhanced using the Registax 6 software. (b) Visible image taken using a ZWO ASI533 MC camera ﬁtted onto a 5 in. Schmidt Cassegrain
Telescope (SCT), at the same time as (a). (c) Simulated eclipse with umbral and penumbral shadows marked (simulated using SkySafari Pro 6). (d) IR imag e
taken at maximum eclipse using an 8 in. reﬂecting telescope, a 35 mm coated IR lens, a Seek Compact Pro thermal imager and an iPad. This is a composite of
12 images stacked by hand and enhanced using the GNU Image Manipulation Program. Hand stacking was necessary here due to the faintness of the images.(e) Visible image of the full Moon with several of the most prominent thermal features indicated by red circles and corresponding crater names (image o f
Moon taken 20 min before the start of the eclipse using the same method as (b)). (f) IR Image from Midcourse Space Experiment satellite during a previous
lunar eclipse (the temperature range is 195–240 K) (Ref. 27).
Fig. 9. Images of Venus taken on May 6, 2020, using a 20 in. reﬂector and an iPhone 8 in (a) visible light using a 24 mm eyepiece and (b) IR eyepiece A
(approximately 100 images stacked). Note that the temperature scale is as measured and does not reﬂect the actual Venus temperature.
128 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Padgett et al. 128 04 October 2023 22:49:32
showed several hot features on the Moon during a total lunar
eclipse (Fig. 8(f)). These correspond to relatively new craters
like Tycho that remain warmer than their surroundings during
the eclipse. The Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter, which exam-
ined thermal anomalies during the lunar day-night cycle,26con-
ﬁrmed that these craters retain heat well into the lunar night.
Although the Moon is barely visible, these thermal anomalies
are still visible for Tycho in Fig. 8(d), which shows an IR
image at maximum eclipse.
These thermal anomalies are associated with young
Copernican-age craters, that is to say craters formed less than
1.1/C2109years ago (Tycho is a prominent example of such a
crater) and are correlated with the reduced depth of regolith
(a layer of unconsolidated debris in the form of dust, soil or bro-
ken rocks) in these young craters.22Most of the lunar surface,
including older craters, is covered with a layer of lunar regolith
that is highly insulating due to its low density and low thermal
conductivity. Thus, the lunar regolith impedes thermal energy
transfer to or from the lunar subsurface, and the top layer of
lunar regolith quickly establishes radiative equilibrium with the
incoming solar ﬂux. During a lunar eclipse, this surface layer of
lunar regolith quickly cools via thermal radiation, while theboulders in the younger, rockier craters have a larger thermal
mass that is directly in contact with the incoming solar radiation.
They, therefore, constitute a large reservoir for heat energy
which they radiate back to space when they are no longer heated
by the Sun, even minutes after they enter the Earth’s shadow.22
The differences in temperature observed by IR imagery aretherefore due to the thermal conductivity differences betweennewer vs older lunar geological features rather than to the sur-
face albedo. While we were not able to collect enough data to
do so due to weather conditions, it should be possible tocalculate cooling rates of various lunar regions during a lunar
eclipse, which could serve as the basis for a nice student project.
3. Observation of planets
After the Moon, nearby planets are the most obvious target
for the amateur astronomer. We used a 20 in. f/5 reﬂecting
telescope ﬁtted with eyepiece A and were able to detect
Mercury, Venus, and Mars.
28Figure 9shows both visible-
light and IR images of Venus. Note that in visible light,
Venus is clearly in the crescent phase, while in the IR, the
entire planetary disk is visible. This is especially notablesince a solar day on Venus is over 100 Earth days in length.
This would provide plenty of time for the dark side of the
planet to cool, if not for the fact that the atmosphere onVenus is 93 times thicker than Earth’s atmosphere and
almost entirely composed of insulating CO
2. The insulating
effect is so extreme that the planet has an essentially uniformsurface temperature and therefore will always appear to be in
the “full” phase through an IR telescope. The AKATSUKI
space probe which examined Venus at several differentwavelengths found similar results.
29In the IR, the cloud tops
and upper atmosphere are visible as the temperature at this
altitude ( /C24100 km) ranges from 30/C14Ct o7 0/C14C and contains
light hazes of various aerosol particles, composed chieﬂy ofsulfuric acid and water.
30
The diameter of Venus using the 20 in. reﬂector and IR
eyepiece A was about 15 pixels, when Venus’ angular sizeas seen from Earth was 43 arc seconds (43"). Mercury’sangular diameter at its greatest elongation (which ranges
between 6.7" and 8.2")
31makes the planet between 2 and 3
pixels in diameter in the IR image, although using eyepieceB could stretch that diameter to 6 pixels. In our case, more-
over, our proximity to the ocean means that low-altitude
observations are especially vulnerable to the obscuringeffects of water vapor. Nonetheless, we were able to image
this planet (Fig. 10). This may be a more feasible project for
readers in more arid climates.
Mars, at opposition, has an apparent size
32between
/C2414 in. and /C2426 in. It would, therefore, be 5–9 pixels in
diameter using eyepiece A and 12–22 pixels with eyepiece
B. As it is farther from the Sun than Earth, Mars will notshow signiﬁcant changes in phase in either the visible or IR
regions as it moves towards or away from opposition: it
always appears in the full or gibbous phase. Figure 11shows
our visible and IR images of Mars.
Fig. 10. IR image of Mercury taken on June 1, 2020 using a 20 in. reﬂector
and an iPhone 8 with Seek Pro camera using IR eyepiece A.
Fig. 11. Images of Mars taken on October 13, 2020, using a 20 in. reﬂector and an iPhone 8 in (a) visible light using a 24 mm eyepiece and (b) IR light usingeyepiece A.
129 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Padgett et al. 129 04 October 2023 22:49:32
Unlike Venus, the temperatures measured for the Moon,
Mars, and Mercury reﬂect surface temperatures as these bod-
ies have atmospheres that are too tenuous to affect the mea-
surement. See supplementary material14for a discussion of
errors in the measured temperatures.
4. Atmospheric attenuation
The observed maximum lunar temperature (OMLT) varies
considerably depending on weather conditions and lunar alti-
tude. For instance, we observed that the presence of thin cir-
rus clouds passing in front of the Moon caused a reduction in
the OMLT from 45/C14Ct o3/C14C in a matter of a few minutes,
while not signiﬁcantly affecting the visual IR image. We
have also seen OMLTs substantially reduced during very
humid summer nights. To quantify the effects of atmosphericattenuation on the measured IR lunar temperature, we took
images using the IR camera every 5 min as the Moon rose.
The altitude of the Moon was determined using SkySafariPro 6. Using Lambert’s law of absorption, which states that
absorbance of a medium is proportional to the thickness of
that medium, we plotted OMLT as a function of air mass inFig.12. Air mass represents the amount of air between the
Moon and the camera and is, therefore, related to the zenith
angle h(angle from vertical): Mass
atmosphere ¼1/cos( h). One
air mass is deﬁned as the amount of air directly overhead
(where h¼0/C14). Since the temperature reported by the camera
is directly proportional to the intensity of IR radiation
received by the camera, the measured temperature of the
Moon drops as more of the atmosphere must be traversed(Fig. 12). We ﬁt the reported temperature to the air mass
between the Moon and the camera to the Beer–Lambert law
T¼Ae
/C0B/C1Mass atmosphere ðÞþC: (6)
As can be seen, the ﬁt of the experimental data in Eq. (6)
is very good, and the coefﬁcients of ﬁt with 95% conﬁdence
intervals were A ¼52 K62K , B ¼0.2360.03, and
C¼291 K62K .
Equation (6)predicts that the lunar temperature that would
be measured without atmospheric absorption is 342 64K ,
whereas the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter observed maxi-mum daytime temperatures at the lunar equator in the range
of 387–397 K.22Despite an error due to the use of the IR
camera with a telescope, whereas it is calibrated for the f-ratio of its lens, our measurement of the lunar temperature is
quite close (within 13%) to its actual value. The attenuationof light by Earth’s atmosphere is, of course, well known, but
this simple experiment provides a nice illustration of thephenomenon.
33
V. CONCLUSION
An introductory planetary astronomy course (generally the
ﬁrst half of a two-semester sequence) tends to use astronomyas a vehicle for introducing important physical concepts suchas the electromagnetic spectrum. To that end, images pro-duced by a variety of telescopes are usually displayed, alongwith the particular feature of that band of the spectrum thatis interesting to astronomers. Radio telescopes can map theconcentration of interstellar hydrogen via the 21 cm line pro-duced in the hyperﬁne transition of the neutral H atom. Sincethe blackbody radiation from stars typically lies in the visibleregion, “ordinary” visible light telescopes are clearly valu-able there. X-ray and gamma-ray telescopes have been usedto study the Sun, pulsars, black holes, gamma-ray bursts, etc.Infrared telescopes, such as the recently launched JamesWebb Space Telescope, are uniquely suited to view planetsnear stars, as the blackbody radiation from these planets canbe expected to peak in the IR, well below the visible-lightpeak of the stars they orbit.
After explaining all of this in a lecture, the observational
component of a lab will almost surely focus exclusively onthe visible region. We have shown that modern develop-ments in consumer-grade thermal imagers allow an infrared
component to be added to observational laboratories. The
reason for doing so is the same as the reason professionalastronomers want to see the universe in a multitude of fre-quencies; things look different in different parts of the spec-trum. Just as typical backyard-astronomy telescopes can beconsidered distant relatives of the Hubble Space Telescope,we have shown how to connect those same telescopes to thenew James Webb Space Telescope.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to disclose.
a)ORCID: 0000-0002-8373-1495.
b)ORCID: 0000-0002-3527-0647.
c)Retired.
1Seehttps://www.thermal.com/compact-series.html for information about
commercially available IR cameras.
2See https://www.ﬂir.com/ﬂir-one/ for information about commercially
available IR cameras.
3K. M €ollman and M. Vollmer, “Infrared thermal imaging as a tool in uni-
versity physics education,” Eur. J. Phys. 28, S37–S50 (2007).
4William H. Baird, Caleb Richards, and Pranav Godbole, “Advanced imag-
ing of elementary circuits,” Phys. Teach. 50(9), 561–562 (2012).
5Tim Gfroerer, Ryan Phillips, and Peter Ross, “Thermal diffusivity imag-
ing,” Am. J. Phys. 83, 923–927 (2015).
6Petr K /C19acovsk /C19y, “Thermal imaging experiments as an inspiration for
problem-based learning,” Phys. Teach. 56(9), 596–599 (2018).
7Christopher Robin Samuelsson, Maja Elmgren, Charles Xie, and Jesper
Haglundg, “Going through a phase: Infrared cameras in a teaching sequence
on evaporation and condensation,” A m .J .P h y s . 87, 577–582 (2019).
8C. Xie, “Visualizing chemistry with infrared imaging,” J. Chem. Ed. 88,
881–885 (2011).
9X. Xu, M. Wu, and X. Wang, “Smartphone visualization of thermal phe-nomena with thermal imaging accessories,” J. Chem. Ed. 96, 2545–2552
(2019).
Fig. 12. Temperature vs air mass (lunar altitude).
130 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Padgett et al. 130 04 October 2023 22:49:32
10T. C. Green, Rebekkah H. Gresh, D. Cochran, Kaitlyn A. Crobar, P. M.
Blass, Alexis D. Ostrowski, D. Campbell, C. Xie, and A. Torelli,
“Invisibility cloaks and hot reactions: Applying infrared thermography in
the chemistry education laboratory,” J. Chem. Ed. 97, 710–718 (2020).
11Jesper Haglund and Konrad J. Sch €onborn, “The pedagogical potential of
infrared cameras in biology education,” Am. Biol. Teach. 81, 520–523
(2019).
12See https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/sunearth/news/light-wavelengt
hs.html for information images of the sun in various wavelengths.
13The effective f-ratio is equal to the f-ratio of the telescope multiplied by
the focal length of the camera divided by the focal length of the eyepieceF
effective ¼Ftelescope ðfcamera =feyepiece Þ. For a 35 mm eyepiece (eyepiece A)
and the Seek compact pro camera ( /C24focal length 6.6 mm) and an f/6 tele-
scope, the effective f-ratio is f/1.13.
14See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0081072 for information about equipment used, the prime focus
method, and errors associated with IR measurements.
15D. Halliday, R. Resnick, and J. Walker, Fundamentals of Physics
Extended , 10th ed. (John Wiley and Sons, NJ, 2014), pp. 1032–1033.
16R. F. Miller, “The magnifying power of a telescope for objects at close
range,” Trans. Kansas Acad. Sci. 42, 381–383 (1939); available at https://
www.jstor.org/stable/3625097 .
17We recommend using only the coated lenses as they greatly reduce stray
light and reﬂection observed, though they do add to the cost of the lenses.
18The ﬁles for the 3D-printed parts are available upon request. We were able to
disassemble an Orion shorty 2 /C2Barlow (No. 08711) and use it to hold the ger-
manium lens from Edmund optics (No. 87-945) without the need to 3D print
parts. The glass lens is simply removed and replaced with the germanium lens.
19The camera has an internal shutter that it moves every /C2430 s over the
micobolometer chip to calibrate it. For this, there must be a thermistor onthe circuit board used to determine the camera’s actual temperature. Since
the shutter is relatively isolated, if the camera is heated or cooled there is a
lag time between the thermistor and shutter temperatures. As a conse-quence, the temperature reading of an object drifts in time.20Modiﬁed from <https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Atmosfaerisk
_spredning-ru.svg >.
21A. Fraknoi, D. Morrison, and S. Wolff, Astronomy , 2nd ed. (OpenStax,
Houston, 2022), pp. 561, 615, 1107, <https://openstax.org/details/books/
astronomy-2e >.
22E. Hecht, Optics , 5th ed. (Pearson, Essex, 2017), p. 615.
23J. P. Williams, D. A. Paige, B. T. Greenhagen, and E. Sefton-Nash, “The
global surface temperatures of the Moon as measured by the Diviner
Lunar radiometer experiment,” Icarus 283, 300–325 (2017).
24See <https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/image-composit
e-editor/ >for information about Microsoft’s Image Composite Editor a
tool for making panoramic images.
25RegiStax 6, available at <https://www.astronomie.be/registax/previewv6.
html>.
26Data set available at <https://pds-geosciences.wustl.edu/missions/msx/
index.htm >and Ref. 22.
27From <https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MSX_moon.jpg >for a
higher resolution image of the moon in IR.
28We took the image of Venus before we purchased the lens for eyepiece B.An image of similar quality should be possible using just an 8 in. telescopeand the 15 mm eyepiece.
29S. Limaye et al. , “Venus looks different from day to night across wave-
lengths: Morphology from Akatsuki multispectral images,” Earth, Planets
Space 70, 24–62 (2018).
30See <https://www.esa.int/Science_Exploration/Space_Science/Venus_Ex
press/The_unexpected_temperature_proﬁle_of_Venus_s_atmosphere >for
information about the temperature proﬁle of Venus’s atmosphere.
31P. Grego, Venus and Mercury and How to Observe Them (Springer, New
York, 2008), p. 213.
32See <http://www.alpo-astronomy.org/jbeish/General_Info_Mars.html >
for information about mars’s orbital parameters.
33E. O. Hulburt, “Attenuation of light in the lower atmosphere,” J. Opt. Soc.
Am.25(5), 125–130 (1935).
131 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 2, February 2023 Padgett et al. 131 04 October 2023 22:49:32
