
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkSEPTEMBER 01 2023
Tutorials in climate modelinga)
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Lane H. Seeley
Am. J. Phys.  91, 690–695 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0134144
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Sample class on Tutorials in Introductory Physics
AIP Conference Proceedings  (March 1997)
Tutorial on vibration and sound
J Acoust Soc Am  (March 2023)
Towards Understanding Classroom Culture: Students’ Perceptions of T utorials
AIP Conference Proceedings  (November 2009) 04 October 2023 22:56:07
Tutorials in climate modelinga)
Lane H. Seeleyb)
Department of Physics, Seattle Paciﬁc University, Seattle, Washington 98119
(Received 8 November 2022; accepted 6 March 2023)
This article describes a learner-centered, tutorial-based approach to climate modeling. Using these
tutorials, students in a general education course in global climate change taught in the physics
department engaged with compelling, “real-world” questions by drawing on foundational physicsconcepts along with their prior experiences and conceptual resources in the process of knowledge
construction. Students used simulations, energy tracking diagrams, and algebraic analysis to
construct climate models that address challenging quantitative questions and reveal key concepts inclimate science. Special emphasis was given to the learning goals, pre-requisite knowledge, and
conceptual challenges associated with these activities. Instructional materials are provided for
educators who wish to adapt these tutorials for use in their own educational context. Thesupplementary materials are appropriate for both non-science majors and upper-level physics
majors.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0134144
I. INTRODUCTION
Global climate change is perhaps the single most important
scientiﬁc issue of our time. The current generation of studentswill be called upon to act decisively to limit the extent ofhuman-caused climate change. They will also be asked torespond equitably and adapt strategically to the impact of achanging climate. To meet these challenges, students should
be empowered with a basic conceptual and quantitative
understanding of the underlying physics of Earth’s changingclimate. There are many excellent educational resources thathave been designed to help students understand the physics ofEarth’s climate.
1,2This article will describe a learner-
centered, tutorial-based approach to climate science in which
students construct and adapt their own climate models. The
unit described here was developed for a physics course onglobal climate change at a small, private, liberal arts univer-sity. This course is open to students from all majors, has nopre-requisites, and uses Andrew Dessler’s Introduction to
Modern Climate Change as a primary textbook.
3In the
activities presented here, students engage with compelling,
“real-world” questions as they draw on foundational physicsconcepts along with their prior experiences and conceptualresources in the process of knowledge construction. Studentsuse simulations, energy tracking diagrams,
4and algebraic
analysis to construct climate models that address challengingquantitative questions and reveal key concepts in climate sci-
ence. Throughout this article, I will reference tutorials and
other instructional resources which are included as the supple-mentary material for instructors to adapt for their instructionalcontext.
The primary learning goals of this unit are as follows:
(1) Students learn to use simple climate models as tools to
engage with signiﬁcant questions about Earth’s changingclimate.
(2) Students recognize that climate change can be reason-
ably approximated as a shift from one state of dynamic
equilibrium to an altered state of dynamic equilibrium.
(3) Students realize that the greenhouse effect warms
Earth’s surface through absorption and emission of infra-red radiation in the atmosphere and which is essential fora habitable planet.(4) Students determine that the release of thermal energy
from fossil fuel combustion can only account for a small
fraction of the recently observed increase in global sur-face temperature.
II. PRE-REQUISITE PHYSICS IDEAS
FOR CLIMATE MODELING
Climate change is a critical socio-political issue, but it
also provides an exciting context for exploring and applyingfundamental physics concepts. For students to understand
and construct climate models, they will need a robust under-
standing of electromagnetic radiation and energy ﬂow. Hereis a brief list of concepts that students will need to construct,
understand, and apply the basic climate models:
•Students recognize that electromagnetic radiation comes
in a wide spectrum of wavelengths, and only a very smallportion of the electromagnetic spectrum is visible to
humans.
•Students differentiate transmission, reﬂection, absorption,
and emission of radiation with a particular emphasis onwhat happens to energy in each of these processes.
•Students recognize that the amount and wavelength of
radiation emitted from an object depends on its tempera-
ture and that all objects above zero kelvin radiate energy.
•Students understand the concept of electromagneticenergy ﬂux and why it is measured in units of W/m2.
•Students can relate these ideas to the Stefan–Boltzmann
law and Wien’s displacement law.
There are many resources for teaching the preceding ideas
about electromagnetic radiation such as the PhET blackbody
spectrum simulation.5
III. ASSESSING STUDENT UNDERSTANDING
OF SHIFTS BETWEEN EQUILIBRIUM STATES
Figure 1illustrates a simpliﬁed, single-layer atmosphere
model for a hypothetical Earth-like planet. In this model,various energy ﬂows in the planet’s atmosphere are repre-
sented by arrows that represent the energy ﬂux averaged
over an annual cycle and the entire surface of the planet. In
690 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp VCAuthor(s) 2023.
 690 04 October 2023 22:56:07
this model, arrow A shows that the globally and annually
averaged solar energy absorbed at the surface of the planet is
238 W/m2. This value is approximately consistent with the
actual average rate of solar energy absorption at Earth’s sur-
face and is described in greater detail in Sec. V. Arrows B
through F represent infrared radiation emitted from the
planet surface (B), infrared radiation that transmits through
the atmosphere (C), infrared radiation absorbed by the atmo-sphere (D), infrared radiation emitted upward from the atmo-
sphere (E), and infrared radiation emitted downward from
the atmosphere (F). For simplicity, this model does not
include incoming solar energy that is reﬂected by the planet
or absorbed by the atmosphere. Understanding climate
modeling requires that students are comfortable using
systems-based reasoning to differentiate equilibrium andnon-equilibrium conditions. Simple climate models often use
an equilibrium approximation in which the energy inputs and
outputs to Earth are in balance. Therefore, students need to
recognize that when system properties change, Earth’s
climate system can shift from one equilibrium state to a dif-
ferent equilibrium state.
I conducted a pre-assessment of student understanding
after they had read a textbook chapter on climate modeling,but before they had completed our tutorials. In our climate
modeling pre-assessment, we posed a scenario in which the
amount of greenhouse gases in a planet’s atmosphere
increases suddenly from a volcanic eruption and the planet
then reaches a new equilibrium state with a higher surface
temperature. Students were asked, “Once the surface temper-
ature has stabilized at a higher level would the rate at whichenergy is leaving the top of the planet’s atmosphere ( C1E)
be greater than, less than, or equal to the rate prior to the
eruption?” Of 31 students in this course, 23 of them expected
that there would now be less total energy leaving the top of
the planet’s atmosphere. The reasoning students used to
explain this answer was consistent, with most of them argu-
ing that the increased greenhouse gases would “trap moreenergy” and allow less energy to leave the atmosphere.
Seven students expected that the total rate of energy leaving
the top of the atmosphere would be equal to the rate prior to
the eruption. These students also had consistent reasoning,
with most of them arguing that once the surface temperatureis stable the energy ﬂows into and out of the planet must be
in balance. These results are consistent with prior studies and
suggest that the critical concept of shifts in equilibrium is
challenging for many students and may not be resolved
through textbook reading or lectures alone.
6
IV. USING FLUID FLOW TO EXPLORE DYNAMIC
EQUILIBRIUM
To help students gain conﬁdence with complex system
analysis, we introduce a water ﬂow system as an analog to
Earth’s climate system. A climate water analogy tutorial is
included in the supplementary material.7In this activity, stu-
dents observe a large, graduated cylinder, which is initially
in dynamic equilibrium with a constant inﬂow from a faucet
and a constant outﬂow from two holes near the bottom of the
cylinder as shown in Fig. 2. Students make detailed predic-
tions for how the water height will change over time when
one of the holes is suddenly plugged. Many students expect
that the water ﬂow from the remaining unblocked hole willincrease as the water level rises. Students often predict this
result based on experience and/or reasoning about waterpressure and depth. Students discuss their predictions with
peers and then observe a demonstration or video in whichthe water level rises quickly and then stabilizes at a new,equilibrium height. With careful observation many studentsrecognize that the outgoing water stream rises slightly as thewater level rises indicative of a greater ﬂow rate. Videos anddata are provided in the supplementary material, but theexperiment can also be easily demonstrated if your class-room has a water faucet. Students can also conduct their owninvestigations if time permits. This tangible example helps
students recognize that when the water level has stabilized
the inﬂow and outﬂow must be back in balance. We havefound that students are able to use this water ﬂow experimentto construct an analogy for energy ﬂow in Earth’s climatesystem. Here is a typical example of a student working outthis analogy for themselves:
“Energy (water) enters the earth (the cylinder) and
gets re-emitted through our atmosphere back intospace. The surface temperature (height of thewater) of the planet sits at an equilibrium pointwith the current amount of greenhouse gasses, butif we were to increase the amount of greenhouse
gases and block more energy from emitting
Fig. 1. Single-layer atmosphere climate model.
Fig. 2. Students make graphical predictions for how the water level will
change over time when one of the holes in a graduated cylinder is suddenly
closed.
691 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Lane H. Seeley 691 04 October 2023 22:56:07
through our atmosphere then the surface tempera-
ture would rise to a new equilibrium point.”
V. MODELING EARTH WITHOUT A GREENHOUSE
EFFECT
It is both pedagogically appropriate and enlightening for stu-
dents to begin by constructing a climate model for Earth with-out a greenhouse effect. This model describes a hypotheticalsituation in which Earth’s atmosphere is entirely composed ofgases like N
2and O 2, which do not absorb in the infrared por-
tion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Students can draw uponthe climate water analogy tutorial to recognize that if Earth’stemperature is stable, the energy inﬂow and outﬂow must be inbalance. We have included a short Modeling Earth Without a
Greenhouse Effect Tutorial in which students estimate the aver-
age surface temperature of Earth without a greenhouse effect.
7
This well-known calculation depends on the following: thesolar constant at Earth’s distance from the Sun, S ¼1360 W/
m2, the average albedo(reﬂectivity) of Earth’s surface in the
solar spectrum, a¼0.30, and the Stefan–Boltzmann approxi-
mation for infrared emissions from Earth’s surface. Uponreﬂection, most students recognize that the result of this calcu-lation, T ¼255 K or /C018
/C14C, is much lower than the actual
average surface temperature of Earth. In fact, at this tempera-ture, Earth would be completely covered by ice, the albedowould be about 0.75, and the average surface temperaturewould be close to /C070
/C14C. This calculation provides students
with a ﬁrst step in quantitatively modeling Earth’s climate. It
also highlights some of the most important and uncontroversialscientiﬁc facts about our climate. Without a greenhouse effect,our planet would be covered in ice and inhospitable for mostlife as we know it. The greenhouse effect is responsible for rais-ing the surface temperature of Earth by approximately 85
/C14C.
Humans have signiﬁcantly increased the concentration of twoof the most signiﬁcant greenhouse gases.8I tw o u l db ev e r ys u r -
prising if these increases in greenhouse gas concentrations didnot have a signiﬁcant impact on Earth’s climate.
VI. MODELING THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT
Once students have studied a climate model for Earth
without a greenhouse effect, they are ready to consider howthe greenhouse effect inﬂuences energy ﬂow. Simulationscan provide an excellent way for students to explore dynamicenergy processes within Earth’s atmosphere. We haveincluded a set of interactive slides which can be used to pro-vide guidance to students as they use the PhET Moleculesand Light simulation to study how visible and infrared pho-tons interact with gas molecules in Earth’s atmosphere.
7
Students recognize that greenhouse gas molecules (CO 2,
CH 4, CO, H 2O, NO 2, and O 3) absorb infrared photons and
emit them in random directions. They also realize that nei-
ther of the most prevalent atmospheric gases, N 2and O 2,
interact with infrared photons and none of these atmosphericgas molecules interact with visible light photons.
We have also developed a set of interactive slides that can
be used to guide students as they use a PhET greenhouse
effect simulation to study the role of greenhouse gases on
energy ﬂows in Earth’s atmosphere.7Using this simulation,
students can observe that when they add greenhouse gases tothe atmosphere, there is a transient period during which lessenergy is leaving the top of the atmosphere than entering.Once the surface temperature stabilizes, the energy leaving
the atmosphere is balanced with the energy entering. Thissecond point is surprising for many students who expect thatwhen greenhouse gases “trap energy,” there will be less
energy leaving than arriving. This simulation along with
ideas developed from the water ﬂow experiment help stu-dents recognize that Earth’s climate system can shift fromone equilibrium state to a different equilibrium state with ahigher average surface temperature.
VII. A BALANCED CLIMATE MODEL
FOR A CHANGING CLIMATE?
Once students have a basic qualitative understanding of
the greenhouse effect, they are ready to begin quantitativeanalysis using simple climate models. Modeling Earth’s cli-mate is simpler if we assume that the energy ﬂows into and
out of the Earth system are in balance. Is this a reasonable
approximation during in a changing climate? We typicallyhave students explore this question individually or in groupsusing online resources before we discuss the question as awhole class. Earth’s oceans can store a lot of thermal energy.According to a 2020 report by the National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration, more than 90% of the climaterelated increase in thermal energy that happened on Earth
between 1971 and 2010 occurred in the ocean.
9This report
also states that, “Averaged over the full depth of the ocean,the 1993–2019 heat-gain rates are 0.55–0.79 W per squaremeter.” The surface area of the ocean is 362 million squarekilometers or 3.62 /C210
14square meters. This means that the
oceans have gained thermal energy at a rate of approxi-mately 2.4 /C21014W. This is a huge amount of thermal
energy, but it is still only about 0.1% of the rate at which
Earth is receiving energy from the Sun. Put another way, forevery 1000 units of energy that arrive from the Sun onlyabout one unit warms up the oceans. The remaining 999units are either reﬂected from Earth or were emitted backinto space as infrared radiation.
10Even during the current
era of relatively rapid climate change, a balanced Earth
remains a fairly accurate approximation.
VIII. A BASELINE MODEL FOR EARTH’S
PRE-INDUSTRIAL CLIMATE
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change uses the
period from 1850 to 1900 as a pre-industrial baseline climate
prior to signiﬁcant anthropogenic, or human caused, climatechange. During this period, the average global surface tem-perature was approximately 14
/C14C. If the solar constant over
Earth’s cross-sectional area ( pR2
EÞis S¼1360 W/m2and the
average albedo is a¼0.30, students calculate in our model-
ing earth without a greenhouse effect tutorial that the aver-
age rate at which solar energy is absorbed over Earth’s entire
surface area (4 pR2
E) is approximately 238 W/m2. For compari-
son, this means that on average each square meter of Earth’ssurface absorbs a power equivalent to six old-fashioned 40-Wincandescent light bulbs. This scenario provides a ﬁrst climatemodeling puzzle for the students as they work through our cli-mate modeling tutorial. Their task is to determine the energyﬂows in arrows B through F that will result in a balanced cli-
mate model according to the following model assumptions.
They assume that the emissivity of Earth’s surface in the infra-red is approximately 1. For simplicity, they also use a single-layer model for Earth’s atmosphere in which a percentage
692 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Lane H. Seeley 692 04 October 2023 22:56:07
of the infrared radiation emitted by Earth’s surface is absorbed
by the atmosphere. In this simpliﬁed model, half of the infrared
radiation absorbed by Earth’s atmosphere is emitted backdown toward the surface, and half is emitted into space.
11
Figure 3shows a solution to a baseline, pre-industrial cli-
mate model in which the surface temperature is 14.0/C14C. To
construct this model, students ﬁrst use the Stefan–Boltzmann
law to determine that the surface emits 385.5 W/m2of infra-
red radiation.12In order to balance energy ﬂows to the sur-
face, the atmosphere must absorb 295.0 W/m2of the
outgoing infrared radiation and emit half of it back to thesurface. This produces a state of dynamic equilibrium in
which the energy ﬂows are balanced at the surface and at the
top of the atmosphere. Students also ﬁnd that for this model
76.52% of the infrared radiation emitted by Earth’s surface
is absorbed by the atmosphere with the remainder transmit-
ting directly through the atmosphere to space.13
IX. TWO POSSIBLE MODELS TO EXPLAIN
CLIMATE CHANGE
Quantitative climate modeling is challenging and can be
frustrating. Nevertheless, quantitative climate models are crit-
ical for understanding how our human actions impact globalclimate. Some of the most fundamental questions about
anthropogenic climate change can only be addressed with
quantitative models. Consider the elicitation question shown
in Fig. 4, which proposes two plausible models to explain the
rise in global temperature over the past 100 years. Both mod-
els described in Fig. 4can qualitatively explain some amount
of global temperature increase. Therefore, answering thisquestion requires rigorous quantitative climate modeling. We
have developed a Climate Modeling Tutorial that guides stu-
dents through a process of constructing and quantitatively
analyzing three different climate models: The baseline pre-
industrial climate model shown in Fig. 3, a model for a 1.0
/C14C
increase in surface temperature caused by release of thermal
energy (Fig. 5(a)) and a model for a 1.0/C14C increase caused by
increased infrared absorption in the atmosphere (Fig. 5(b)).7
A. Modeling climate change from thermal energy
or greenhouse gases
If the Earth’s average surface temperature increases 1.0/C14C
to 15.0/C14C, the surface will emit 390.9 W/m2of infrared radia-
tion. The model in Fig. 5(a)depicts a hypothetical scenario inwhich this increase in surface temperature is entirely caused
by the release of thermal energy at Earth’s surface. In this
model, the fraction of infrared radiation absorbed by the
atmosphere would remain at 76.52% as in the baseline model.Balancing energy ﬂows to the surface would require an input
of thermal energy of approximately 3.3 W/m2at the surface
from the combustion of fossil fuels. In this model, both theatmosphere and Earth’s surface are in dynamic equilibrium,
but there is net outﬂow of 3.3 W/m2at the top of the atmo-
sphere from the fossil fuel energy which is extracted frombelow Earth’s surface. Alternatively, the model in Fig. 5(b)
depicts the hypothetical scenario in which the entire increase
in surface temperature is caused by an increase in the percent-
age of infrared radiation absorbed by the atmosphere. In thissimpliﬁed model, an increase in atmospheric absorption from
76.52% to 78.23% is sufﬁcient to cause an increase in global
surface temperature of 1.0
/C14C.
To decide which of these later two models provides a
quantitatively reasonable explanation for a 1.0/C14C rise in
average surface temperature, students are encouraged to
search online for an estimate of the current rate at which fos-sil fuel combustion is releasing thermal energy at Earth’s
surface.14The rate at which humans are releasing energy per
square meter of Earth’s surface is called the anthropogenic
heat ﬂux . While the anthropogenic heat ﬂux can have a sig-
niﬁcant impact on the surface temperature in densely popu-
lated areas, globally averaged, it is only about 0.03 W/m2.15
Therefore, the release of thermal energy at the surface can
only explain about 1% of the observed rise in global surface
temperature.
When students have completed our climate modeling tuto-
rial, they next complete homework in which they synthesize
the results of their analysis in the tutorial. On this homework
assignment, we found that all 31 students described a shift toa new equilibrium state. Furthermore, most students wereable to use their climate modeling to argue that the thermal
energy model is quantitatively insufﬁcient to explain the
observed increase we have seen in global surface tempera-ture. A typical example of student reasoning was, “If the
Earth’s surface were at 15
/C14C and the percentage of infrared
energy absorbed by the atmosphere remained the same as at14
/C14C (meaning no increase in greenhouse gas effect), thenFig. 3. A baseline model for Earth’s pre-industrial climate. Students deter-
mine the energy ﬂows in arrows B through F, which balance this climate
model.
Fig. 4. A challenging question to motivate student curiosity and engagement
with quantitative climate modeling.
693 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Lane H. Seeley 693 04 October 2023 22:56:07
we would need to be adding 3.05 W/m2of thermal energy to
the surface to maintain this temperature. This value is much
greater than the amount of thermal energy we are actuallyadding (0.028 W/m
2).”
B. Going further: Modeling forcing, feedback,
and climate sensitivity
The preceding analysis demonstrates that anthropogenic
heat ﬂux cannot be the primary cause of climate change. It ismore difﬁcult to quantitatively evaluate the role of anthropo-
genic carbon dioxide as a driver of climate change. Since
pre-industrial times, the amount of carbon dioxide in Earth’satmosphere has increased by about 50%. Yet, the climactic
impact of this additional atmospheric CO
2is complicated for
several reasons. Greenhouse gases absorb infrared radiationat all altitudes, so a single-layer model for Earth’s atmo-sphere is a fairly limited approximation. In addition, there
are several other greenhouse gases (CH
4, CO, NO 2, etc.),
and water vapor is responsible for about half of Earth’sgreenhouse effect.
16For courses with sufﬁcient time and stu-
dent interest to pursue climate modeling further, we have
developed an activity in which students model a climate inwhich atmospheric carbon dioxide has doubled.
7This activ-
ity develops the important climate modeling ideas of forc-
ings, feedbacks, and climate sensitivity. We begin byintroducing students to the idea of radiative forcing.
Radiative forcing describes a method of quantifying a
change to the climate system according to an equivalentchange in absorbed solar energy. For example, doubling
atmospheric CO
2is estimated to produce a forcing equiva-
lent to an increase in solar absorption of approximately 4 W/m
2according an estimate provided on page 96 of Ref. 3.I n
other words, it is estimated that doubling carbon dioxide
would have approximately the same impact on global cli-mate as increasing the amount of absorbed solar energy by
4W / m
2. This estimate is widely accepted by climate scien-
tists because it does not depend on feedbacks, which are themost challenging aspects of global climate to accurately
model. In this activity, students can reﬁne their climate
model to show that a forcing of 4.0 W/m
2would require an
increase in atmospheric absorption of approximately 2%,
from 76.52% in Fig. 4to 78.60% in Fig. 6(a). Notice that if
the atmospheric absorption increases to 78.60% and thesurface temperature initially remains at 14.0/C14C, the total rate
at which infrared energy is leaving the planet, C þE,
decreases by 4.0 W/m2. For the planet to get back into energy
balance, the average rate of infrared emissions from the sur-
face would need to increase to 392.1 W/m2as shown in Fig.
6(b). According to the Stefan–Boltzmann law, this would
require an increase in global surface temperature of approxi-
mately 1.2/C14C before feedbacks are considered.
Climate scientists use a climate feedback parameter to
quantitatively relate the Earth’s surface temperature change
after feedbacks to the temperature change without feedbacks
according to the following equation:
DTf¼DTi
ð1/C0gÞ:
Here,DTiis the average surface temperature increase without
feedbacks, DTfis the average surface temperature change after
feedbacks, and gis the feedback parameter. When we use an
initial temperature change of 1.2/C14C and a reasonable estimate
for the feedback parameter of g¼0.6, we get a ﬁnal tempera-
ture change estimate with feedback of 3/C14C. These values are
based on estimates provided on pages 104 and 105 of Ref. 3.
For comparison, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) estimates that when feedbacks are includedthe impact of doubling atmospheric carbon dioxide on global
surface temperature would be an increase of between 2
/C14Ca n d
5/C14C.17It is empowering for students to see that a simple cli-
mate model can provide estimates that are in rough agreement
with the most sophisticated climate science estimates.
X. CONCLUSIONS
Understanding Earth’s changing climate is socio-
politically relevant and can be intellectually engaging for all
students. In this article, we have described a sequence oftutorials that are designed to provide scaffolding as students
construct and reﬁne their own climate models. We believe
that supporting students in constructing climate understand-ing will cultivate a deeper and more ﬂexible understanding
of Earth’s climate. It is also possible that this constructivist
approach to climate learning will result in greater self-efﬁcacy as students confront the many challenges associated
with climate change. We have found that these tutorials are
accessible to non-science majors but are also challenging for
Fig. 5. (a) A hypothetic model in which a 1.0/C14C rise in average surface temperature is entirely caused by thermal energy released at the surface. (b) A differ-
ent, hypothetical model in which a 1.0/C14C rise in average surface temperature is entirely caused by an increase in absorption of infrared radiation by Earth’s
atmosphere.
694 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Lane H. Seeley 694 04 October 2023 22:56:07
upper-level physics and engineering students. We have
included these tutorials as a supplementary material forinstructors who wish to adapt them to best ﬁt their learninggoals and instructional context.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wants to thank the many students and Learning
Assistants who have participated in his course on Global
Climate Change at Seattle Paciﬁc University and havecontributed to the testing and reﬁnement of these activitiesover the past 6 years.
AUTHOR DECLARATIONS
Conflict of Interest
The author has no conﬂicts to disclose.
a)Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the environ-
ment, sustainability, and climate change.
b)ORCID: 0000-0002-3044-6359.
1S. E. Schwartz, “Resource letter GECC-2: The greenhouse effect and cli-mate change: The intensiﬁed greenhouse effect,” Am. J. Phys. 86,
645–656 (2018).
2M. D. Mastandrea, “Resource letter GW-2: Global warming,” Am. J.
Phys. 76, 608–614 (2008).
3A. Dessler, Introduction to Modern Climate Change , 3rd ed. (Cambridge
U. P., Cambridge, 2022).
4R. E. Scherr et al. , “Energy tracking diagrams,” Phys. Teach. 54(2),
96–102 (2016).
5See, for example, <https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/blackbody-
spectrum >
6J. M. Keller, Development of a Concept Inventory Addressing
Students’ Beliefs and Reasoning Difﬁculties regarding the Greenhouse
Effect, Part II. Distribution of Chlorine Measured by the MarsOdyssey Gamma Ray Spectrometer (The University of Arizona Press,
Tuscon, 2006).
7See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0134144 for the details of climate water analogy tutorial,
modeling earth without a greenhouse effect tutorial, PhET molecules andlight interactive slides, PhET greenhouse effect interactive slides, climatemodeling tutorial, and forcing and feedback tutorial.
8Water vapor is the most important greenhouse gas, but the concentration
of water vapor in Earth’s atmosphere is largely controlled by the oceansurface temperature.
9R. Lindsey and L. Dahlman, “Climate change: Ocean heat content,”<https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-
change-ocean-heat-content >.
10J. Donev, “Earth’s energy ﬂow,” University of Calgary, <https://energye-
ducation.ca/encyclopedia/Earth%27s_energy_ﬂow >.
11We encourage students to calculate energy ﬂows to at least one decimal
place to avoid signiﬁcant and confusing rounding errors.
12This assumes an emissivity for the Earth’s surface of 1.0 in the infrared forsimplicity.
13We encourage students to calculate the atmospheric absorption to
four signiﬁcant ﬁgures to avoid signiﬁcant and confusing rounding
errors.
14J. Aizarani, “Fossil fuel consumption worldwide from 1965 to 2020,”Statista, <https://www.statista.com/statistics/1302754/fossil-fuel-energy-
consumption-worldwide/ >.
15M. G. Flanner, “Integrating anthropogenic heat ﬂux with global climate
models.” Geophys. Res. Lett. 36(2), L02801 (2009), https://doi.org/
10.1029/2008GL036465.
16A. Buis, “Steamy relationships: How atmospheric water vaporampliﬁes earth’s greenhouse effect,” NASA’s Jet PropulsionLaboratory, <https://climate.nasa.gov/ask-nasa-climate/3143/steamy-
relationships-how-atmospheric-water-vapor-ampliﬁes-earths-greenhouse-effect/ >.
17P. T. Forster et al. , “The earth’s energy budget, climate feedbacks, and cli-
mate sensitivity,” in Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of theIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge U. P.,
Cambridge, 2021), pp. 923–1054.
Fig. 6. (a) A model showing how it is possible to produce a radiative forcing of 4 W/m2by increasing the percentage of infrared radiation absorbed by Earth’s
atmosphere from 76.52% to 78.60%. To re-balance the climate model, as shown in (b), the outgoing infrared radiation must increase to 392.1 W/m2, which
requires an increase in average surface temperature to 15.2/C14C.
695 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Lane H. Seeley 695 04 October 2023 22:56:07
