
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkBOOK REVIEWS| SEPTEMBER 01 2023
Unsettled: What Climate Science T ells Us, What It Doesn't,
and Why It Matters 
Special Collection:  Teaching about the environment, sustainability , and climate change
Unsettled: What Climate Science T ells Us, What It Doesn't, and Why It Matters. . Steven R.  Koonin . 320 pp.  BenBella Books ,
 2021 . ISBN 1-950-665-79-8. (Nadir Jeevanjee, Reviewer .)
Am. J. Phys.  91, 753–754 (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0154687
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
The Physics of Electric Cars
Phys. T each.  (September 2022)
Physics Roundtable: Reinventing Our Future
Physics T oday  (March 1994)
At Last W e Have an Undisputed Observation of ‘Direct’ CP Violation in Kaon Decay
Physics T oday  (May 1999) 04 October 2023 22:57:26
BOOK REVIEWS
Sathya Guruswamy, Editor
Department of Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106; email: sgurus@ucsb.edu
Unsettled: What Climate Science Tells Us, What It
Doesn’t, and Why It Matters. Steven R. Koonin. 320
pp. BenBella Books, 2021. ISBN 1-950-665-79-8.
(Nadir Jeevanjee, Reviewer.)
There is a skeptical streak in the physics community
regarding climate science. Decorated physicists, such asPrinceton’s Will Happer and the late Freeman Dyson, have
declared in op-eds and interviews that climate change is not
a serious problem.
1Berkeley’s Richard Muller grew so con-
cerned over the potential mistreatment of temperature station
data (i.e., “Climategate”2) that he and collaborators per-
formed their own temperature reconstructions, which arenow a standard dataset in climate science.
3When the
American Physical Society (APS) set out to revise their
statement on climate change in 2014, controversy eruptedwhen the drafting committee gave equal weight to skeptical
and mainstream voices in the drafting process. Higher-ups in
the APS subsequently took control of the statement, revisingit to better reﬂect the consensus as embodied in the 2013
IPCC report, and the original drafting committee head
resigned.
4
That drafting committee head was Steven R. Koonin, an
established Caltech nuclear physicist with extensive real-
world credentials, having served on the JASON advisorypanel, as BP’s chief scientist, and as deputy undersecretary
for energy in the Obama administration. After resigning
from the APS panel, Koonin wrote a 2014 Wall StreetJournal op-ed arguing that climate science is not as settled as
it is might appear to be.
5Koonin’s recent book, Unsettled ,i s
an extension and elaboration of those arguments.
Unsettled covers a lot of ground, but a recurring argument
is that historical observations of climate and weather phe-
nomena are too noisy and uncertain to make deﬁnitive state-ments about human inﬂuence. Yet, such deﬁnitive
statements can be found in the mass media and even some
government reports, thus exaggerating both the impacts ofclimate change and the urgency of mitigating it. Given his
physicist’s penchant for data, Koonin takes a deep dive into
a few examples of such distortion, including:
(1)Heat waves. Koonin pushes back on claims that heat
waves in the U.S. are becoming more frequent, becausesuch claims often neglect the time period before 1950.
That period includes the many heat waves during the
Dust Bowl, and including these older records makes along term trend in U.S. heat waves less evident.
(2)Sea level rise and glacier melt. Koonin points out that
there is signiﬁcant variability in the rate of sea level rise
over the last century, which does not seem to correlatewith human inﬂuence. He doubled down on this claim ina recent op-ed,
6noting that today’s large rates of
Greenland ice loss are actually comparable to those from80 years ago, when greenhouse gas concentrations were
much lower.
(3)Tropical cyclones. Koonin notes that a prominent U.S.
climate change report portrays tropical cyclone activity
as trending upwards. But this is only true since 1960, and
(again) including older records reveals no strong long-term trend.
On these points, and others like them, Koonin is largely
correct. Signal-to-noise issues, as well as poor data availabil-ity, often confound attempts to detect trends and attributethem to global warming. The dust bowl indeed complicatesthe U.S. temperature record, and even the summary ﬁgure inthe latest IPCC report (AR6WG1 Fig. SPM.3, reproducedhere as Fig. 1) shows essentially no long term trend in heat
waves in the central and eastern U.S. Similarly, there isindeed substantial variability in the rates of sea-level rise andice-sheet melt, which go underemphasized in governmentreports. Koonin is correct that the statistics of tropical cyclo-nes are noisy and multi-faceted, and that metrics which mea-sure tropical cyclone frequency (rather than intensity) tend
not to show a global warming signal.
These facts will likely surprise most readers. Such nuances
often do not survive the long game of telephone among thescientiﬁc literature, government reports, and associatedmedia coverage. Public perception on these issues can indeed
stray from the science, and Koonin does us a service by
emphasizing the need for accuracy and integrity in climatecommunication.
Yet, by focusing on these narrow issues, Koonin down-
plays the bigger picture, in ways that can mislead the reader.
An excellent example of this is Fig. 1, which shows that
while most of the U.S. does not exhibit a signiﬁcant trend inheat waves, every other region of the globe does (besides the
Congo and Patagonia where data are limited). Furthermore,these trends can be attributed to human inﬂuence. Thesefacts go unmentioned in Unsettled. Similarly, while it is true
that Greenland mass loss rates have signiﬁcant natural vari-ability, these loss rates have nonetheless remained stronglypositive throughout the 20th century, but were close to zeroprior to that, broadly consistent with global warming.
7
By focusing almost entirely on our limited observational
records, Koonin also misses out on the perspective whichemerges when one looks beyond historical datasets. Ourunderstanding of sea level rise and extreme weather stemsnot just from records of past variations but also from climatemodel projections of future warming, which tell us unani-
mously that heat waves will increase, sea level rise willaccelerate, and hurricanes will intensify on a warmer planet.
Koonin, however, ignores such model projections entirely.
He argues that because climate models require empiricaladjustments known as “tuning,” and because their quantita-tive predictions often span a wide range, they cannot be
753 Am. J. Phys. 91(9), September 2023 http://aapt.org/ajp #2023 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 753 04 October 2023 22:57:26
trusted to tell us anything at all. However, as a veteran mod-
eler himself, Koonin surely knows that any model will be ﬁt
for some purposes and not for others. Admittedly, today’sclimate models do not provide robust predictions of certain
key aspects of global warming, such as regional climate
change (especially hydroclimate changes). To some degree,this is because certain processes, such as thunderstorms, can-
not be resolved by models’ coarse discretizations of Earth’s
atmosphere, so must be represented in a more ad hoc man-
ner. However, other phenomena, such as heat waves and
tropical cyclones, arereasonably well represented by mod-
els, and consistently intensify under global warming. Thisintensiﬁcation also comports with our physical understanding,
in that an overall shift to higher temperatures will naturally
lead to more frequent and intense heat waves, and a warmeratmosphere contains more water vapor which then fuels more
intense hurricanes. There are, thus, many aspects of global
warming for which climate models areﬁt for purpose, based
on consistency across models as well as basic physics.
Koonin’s critiques of climate science and how it is com-
municated have some merit. The subtle science of our com-plex Earth system is particularly ill-suited for headlines and
sound bites. Modeling results are sometimes received too
credulously, rather than with an appropriately sized grain ofsalt. However, these critiques do not add up to an indictment
of climate science. Furthermore, in dismissing the entire ﬁeld
of climate modeling, and in quibbling about historical datasets, Koonin ends up misleading readers and missing the
larger predicament we are in: Our models and the laws of
physics paint a picture of the world to come, and the data aretelling us that this world is around the corner, and in some
ways has already arrived.Nadir Jeevanjee is a Research Scientist at NOAA’s
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, a climate model-
ing center in Princeton, NJ. He holds a PhD in Physics from
UC Berkeley and is the author of the mathematical physics
text “An Introduction to Tensors and Group Theory for
Physicists.” The views expressed herein are in no sense offi-
cial positions of the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, or the Department of Commerce.
Note: This paper is part of the special issue on Teaching about the environ-
ment, sustainability, and climate change.
1See, for instance, the op-ed by Will Happer, “Global warming models arewrong again,” Wall Street Journal , March 27, 2012 <https://www.
wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052702304636404577291352882984274 >;
or the cover story on Freeman Dyson by Nicholas Dawidoff, “
The Civic
Heretic,” New York Times Magazine , March 25, 2009 <https://www.
nytimes.com/2009/03/29/magazine/29Dyson-t.html >.
2See, e.g., F. Pearce, The Climate Files: The Battle for the Truth About
Global Warming (Guardian Faber Publishing, London, 2010).
3Berkeleyearth.org.
4See this account from Gayathri Vaidyanathan, “Physicists battle over the
meaning of ‘incontrovertible’ in global warming ﬁght,” Scientiﬁc
American , April 14, 2015. <https://www.scientiﬁcamerican.com/article/
physicists-battle-over-the-meaning-of-incontrovertible-in-global-warming-ﬁght/>.
5See “Climate science is not settled,” Wall Street Journal, September 19, 2014
<https://www.wsj.com/articles/climate-science-is-not-settled-1411143565 >.
6See “Greenland’s melting ice is no cause for climate-change panic,” Wall
Street Journal, February 17, 2022. <https://www.wsj.com/articles/
greenland-melting-ice-panic-sheets-global-warming-variance-seal-level-rise-climate-change-carbon-fossil-fuel-11645131739?mod ¼article_inline >.
7See Kenneth D. Mankoff et al. , “Greenland ice sheet mass balance from
1840 through next week,” Earth System Science Data 13.10 (2021), pp.
5001–5025, as well as the rebuttal to Koonin’s op-ed by Mankoff andothers, “Disputing Koonin on Greenland’s melting ice,” Wall Street
Journal , February 27, 2022. <https://www.wsj.com/articles/koonin-
greenland-ice-loss-melting-climate-change-11645828198 >.
Fig. 1. IPCC 2021 assessment of trends in heat extremes. While signal-to-noise issues confound trend identiﬁcation in the central and eastern U.S., v irtually
every other region of the globe shows a statistically signiﬁcant positive trend which can be attributed in large part to global warming. Taken from Fig SPM.3
of Masson-Delmotte et al. , “IPCC, 2021: Summary for policymakers. in: Climate change 2021: The physical science basis. contribution of working group I to
the sixth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change.”
754 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 91, No. 9, September 2023 Book Reviews 754 04 October 2023 22:57:26
