
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkGUEST EDITORIAL| APRIL 01 2022
Updating our language to help students learn: Mechanical
energy is not conserved but all forces conserve energy 
Am. J. Phys.  90, 251–252 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0067448
 CHORUS
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Large scale rigidity-based flexibility analysis of biomolecules
Struct Dyn  (February 2016)
Understanding acoustic-phonetic environments of prelingual children with cochlear implants: Challenges,
tools, and insights
J Acoust Soc Am  (March 2019)
Application of the project method for teaching a foreign language to future railway transport engineers
AIP Conference Proceedings  (September 2021) 04 October 2023 23:05:59
GUEST EDITORIAL
Updating our language to help students learn: Mechanical energy is not
conserved but all forces conserve energy
(Received 16 August 2021; accepted 3 January 2022)
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0067448
Conservation laws are some of the most fundamental prin-
ciples in science. We recognize conserved quantities such asenergy, momentum, and electric charge as much more rareand profound than quantities that are merely constant insome situations. The number of ice cubes in my freezermight be constant for a period of time. That doesn’t meanice cube number is a conserved quantity; their constant num-
ber is a consequence of particular circumstances for my
freezer, not resulting from some profound natural principle.In fact, very few quantities are actually conserved, and allconservation laws that scientists have discovered are basedon fundamental symmetries in nature.
In a national study of Content Knowledge for Teaching
(CKT) energy, we found that a systems-based approach toenergy conservation was among the most challenging areasof energy understanding for both high school physics teach-ers and physics majors.
1These difﬁculties are rooted in the
failure to distinguish a conserved quantity from a quantitythat, like ice cubes, is merely constant for some systems in
some situations. In this paper, we are building on these ﬁnd-
ings to argue that:
I. Mechanical energy, like any other sub-category of
energy, is never a conserved quantity, even though it
might remain constant for some systems during cer-
tain processes.
II. The language of “conservative” and “non-conservative”
forces has no direct relationship to any conserved quan-
tity and s hould be replaced with another labeling system,
for example, “path-independent” and “path-dependent”
forces (or some alternative taxonomy that better commu-
nicates the nature of the difference between these typesof forces).
We recognize that these suggestions come with signiﬁcant
practical implications. Nearly all popular introductory
physics textbooks introduce “non-conservative” forces.These textbooks agree that a force is non-conservative if thework done by that force is path dependent. With a couple ofnoteworthy exemptions,
2,3these textbooks consistently
describe mechanical energy as a quantity that is “conserved”as long as non-conservative forces do no work. There are sig-niﬁcant differences in the way that the idea of conservationof mechanical energy is treated in various textbooks. Wethink one of the most coherent examples of a conditionalconservation approach to mechanical energy is in Physics forScientists and Engineers by Serway and Jewett where theywrite, “If nonconservative forces act in an isolated system,
the total energy of the system is conserved, although the
mechanical energy is not.”
4Jewett uses similar language in
his articles on Energy and the Confused Student .5Some
other treatments of mechanical energy and non-conservativeforces are similarly coherent while others are signiﬁcantly
more problematic, in our view.
If mechanical energy is not a fundamentally conserved
quantity based on a symmetry in nature, then why do mostphysics textbooks describe mechanical energy as a quantity
that is sometimes conserved ? Perhaps, this is because for
many of the classic, idealized mechanics scenarios (friction-
less inclines, ideal springs, perpetual pendula, and perfect
projectiles), energy seemlessly converts between kinetic and
gravitational or elastic while mechanical energy remains
constant . These examples motivate an approach, in which
mechanical energy is conditionally conserved in the absence
of non-conservative forces. We object to this approach for
practical and pedagogical reasons. Aside from gravitational,
electrostatic, and magnetic interactions, essentially all mac-
roscopic forces that students experience in their lives outside
of physics class are at least somewhat path dependent. If we
hope to empower students to apply their energy understand-ing to real-world situations that they care about, we should
help them construct an energy model that applies to a world
dominated by “non-conservative” forces.
Most physics teachers strive to help their students engage rig-
orously with the fundamental but challenging idea of energy
conservation. Blocks slide to a stop and energy seems to vanish.
Bubbles rise in a pool, and energy seems to come from
nowhere. In these and every other aspect of our lived experi-
ence, total energy is always conserved.
6In fact, conservation is
perhaps the best explanation of what energy actually is. It’s easy
to recite the mantra that energy is never created or destroyed.Mapping out this idea in a physical world in which energy mani-
fests in so many diverse and elusive ways is both formidable
and extremely valuable. So why would we complicate one of
the most powerful ideas in all of science by suggesting that
mechanical energy is also a conserved quantity, but only some-
times? It is like ﬁrst helping students recognize that mass is con-
served during evaporation and then telling them that “liquidmass” is also a conserved quantity, but only sometimes, when
“non-conservative” phase changes don’t occur.
Instead, we could consistently emphasize the idea that
energy is always conserved, for all systems and any force
251 Am. J. Phys. 90(4), April 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp VC2022 Author(s) 251 04 October 2023 23:05:59
interactions, and mechanical energy, like all other subcatego-
ries of energy, is merely constant under speciﬁc circumstances
for some systems. Distinguishing a conserved quantity from
quantities that are merely constant is a crucial idea for under-
standing and applying conservation, yet it is also subtle. If we
want students to deeply understand the fundamental idea that
total energy of any system is always conserved (however, not
necessarily constant) then we should not unnecessarily seedconfusion by introducing some forces as “non-conservative.”
The very language of “non-conservative” forces suggests that
these forces disrupt energy conservation. Who could fault a
student for thinking that energy is not conserved when there is
signiﬁcant friction or air resistance? Who could fault a student
for thinking that the energy conservation principle is unim-
pressive and irrelevant outside physics class if it doesn’t applyto cases involving friction, air resistance, human beings, or
useful mechanical devices? We hope our students will gain
conﬁdence in their understanding that energy is conserved
even when “non-conservative” forces do work, so let’s stop
calling them non-conservative forces. In our view this
approach is consistent with the “uniﬁed, contemporary
approach to teaching energy” outlined in a recent article inthis journal by Chabay, Sherwood and Titus.
7
We realize that the language of “conservative” forces has
a venerable legacy in our discipline. Changing this language
would not merely entail changing introductory textbooks.
We would need to change upper division mechanics text-
books. We contend, however, that this language is even con-
fusing for many upper division students. For anecdotal
evidence, try asking some upper division physics students
why we call some forces non-conservative and how thatrelates to the principle of energy conservation. We hope that
citizens who have completed only high school physics might
have a relevant and ﬂexible understanding of energy conser-
vation. Therefore, it’s essential that the physics majors who
serve as their teachers harbor no confusions related to these
ideas. The same should be expected of their teachers who do
not have a physics or physics education major. There areadditional challenges associated with the coherence of the
energy instruction that this latter group receives in their prep-
aration, which go beyond the scope of this article.
If we choose to move away from the language of
“conservative” and “non-conservative” forces, we have sev-
eral alternatives to choose from. We could call conservative
forces path-independent orconﬁguration-forces and non-
conservative forces path-dependent ormotion dependent .
This new language would not automatically bring clarityand understanding, but it could prevent us from using
language that is likely to confuse students unnecessarily. Itmight even help students engage with real-world stuff like
dynamic climbing ropes and mountain bicycle shock
absorbers for which forces depend both on conﬁguration
and motion. We hope this editorial will also serve asencouragement to physics education researchers to study
the resources that students have for making sense of the
complex relationship between forces and energy conver-sions. This research will help us to identify and prioritize
language that supports student sense-making and inclusion
over language that is familiar to those few of us who alreadyfeel included.
8
Lane Seeley
Department of Physics
Seattle Paciﬁc University
Seattle, Washington 98119
Stamatis Vokos
Physics Department
California Polytechnic State University
San Luis Obispo, California 93407
Eugenia Etkina
Department of Learning and Teaching
Rutgers University Graduate School of Education
New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901
1L. Seeley, S. Vokos, and E. Etkina, “Examining physics teacher under-
standing of systems and the role it plays in supporting student energy rea-
soning,” Am. J. Phys. 87, 510–519 (2019).
2E. Etkina, G. Planinsic, and A. van Heuvelen, College Physics: Explore
and Apply (Pearson, London, 2019).
3E. Mazur, The Principles and Practice of Physics (Pearson, London,
2015).
4R. Serway and J. Jewett, Physics for Scientists and Engineers (Cengage,
Boston, MA, 2018), p. 186.
5John W. Jewett, Jr., “Energy and the confused student II: Systems,” Phys.
Teach. 46, 81–86 (2008).
6We recognize that mass-energy is actually the fundamentally conserved
quantity but for this editorial, we follow the approach of most introductions
to energy conservation and ignore nuclear processes, in which mass is con-
verted into other forms of energy. The approach we promote is epistemo-
logically sound. One of the exciting chapters of the history of energy is the
debate between physicists and geologists about the rate of cooling of Earth
and the age of our planet, before radioactive decay in the Earth’s interior
was taken into account. Scientists introduce new forms of energy when con-servation of total energy demands it.
7R. Chabay, B. Sherwood, and A. Titus, “A uniﬁed, contemporary approach toteaching energy in introductory physics,” Am. J. Phys. 87, 504–509 (2019).
8See the supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0067448 for further elaboration of an alternative scheme for
classifying forces according to their role in energy transfers/
conversions.
252 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 4, April 2022 Guest Editorial 252 04 October 2023 23:05:59
