
View
Online
Export
CitationCrossMarkPAPERS| OCTOBER 01 2022
Waving arms around to teach quantum mechanics 
Kelby T . Hahn  
 ; Elizabeth Gire  
Am. J. Phys.  90, 778–786 (2022)
https://doi.org/10.1 119/5.0073946
 CHORUS
Articles Y ou May Be Interested In
Argand plot and conduction mechanism study of N+ implanted CR-39 polymer
AIP Conference Proceedings  (April 2019)
A step forward in kinesthetic activities for teaching kinematics in introductory physics
Am. J. Phys.  (October 2020)
Argand diagrams, harmonic oscillators, and record ‐ playing tonearms
American Journal of Physics  (April 1986) 04 October 2023 23:19:00
Waving arms around to teach quantum mechanics
Kelby T. Hahna)
College of Education, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-6507
Elizabeth Gireb)
Department of Physics, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-6507
(Received 5 October 2021; accepted 22 June 2022)
Kinesthetic (or embodied) representations help students build intuition and deep understanding of
concepts. This paper presents a series of kinesthetic activities for a spins-ﬁrst undergraduate
quantum mechanics course that supports students in reasoning and developing intuition about thecomplex-valued vectors of spin states. The arms representation, used in these activities, was
developed as a tangible representation of complex numbers: Students act as an Argand diagram,
using their left arm to represent numbers in the complex plane. The arms representation is versatileand can be expanded to depict complex-valued vectors with groups of students. This expansion
enables groups of students to represent quantum mechanical state vectors with their arms. We have
developed activities using the arms representation that parallel the progression of a spins-ﬁrstapproach by starting with complex numbers, then representing two- and three-state systems,
considering time-dependence, and, eventually, extending to approximate wavefunctions. Each
activity illustrates the complex nature of quantum states and provides a tangible manipulative fromwhich students can build intuition about quantum phenomena.
#2022 Published under an exclusive license
by American Association of Physics Teachers.
https://doi.org/10.1119/5.0073946
I. INTRODUCTION
A particularly challenging aspect of quantum mechanics is
the fundamental role complex numbers play in concepts,mathematics, and geometry.1,2In a spins-ﬁrst approach,3–5
also known as the Stern–Gerlach-ﬁrst approach,6students are
introduced to a ﬁnite Hilbert space for spin systems andexplore quantum mechanics through Stern–Gerlach experi-ments. This spins-ﬁrst approach is increasing in popularityand has a distinct advantage, compared to the wavefunction-or position-ﬁrst approach, of providing a conceptually richintroduction to the quantum postulates without requiring theadvanced mathematics needed to solve differential equations.
One noteworthy mathematical trade-off of the spins-ﬁrst
approach is that students work with the complex nature of
quantum states right at the start of the course when they rep-resent quantum spin states as complex-valued vectors.Matrix notation and bra-ket notation are used from the begin-ning. The traditional mathematics courses required forphysics majors (i.e., calculus, inﬁnite series and sequences,differential equations, and linear algebra) may not providestudents with the in-depth understanding of complex num-bers necessary to parse the signiﬁcance and geometry ofthese complex vector components.
7To help students build
intuition concerning these mathematical objects, many visu-alization options have been proposed.8–16Although these
visualizations support aspects of students’ reasoning, theymay impose additional burdens on (1) students (to coordinatemultiple representations for a single quantum state
8,9or to
parse complex nested diagrams14), (2) educators (to write,
maintain, and acclimate to new textbooks15,16), and (3) class-
room technology (to generate higher dimensional graphs,
which is resource-intensive10–13). Despite strengthening
student understanding, these visualizations still requirestudents to navigate coordinating between representationsand, in turn, further convolute the already abstract concept ofquantum states. In an effort to lessen the abstraction andhighlight key geometric relationships, the arms representation
was designed as a tangible metaphor for quantum states.
17
In this paper, we present the arms representation, a kines-
thetic, Argand-based representation for complex-valuedvectors, and the accompanying arms activities, a cluster ofclassroom exercises to support a spins-ﬁrst approach toteaching quantum mechanics. These are instructor-guided,
whole-class, active-engagement activities where students
stand up and use their left arms to represent complex num-bers. Arms was designed to develop student understandingwhile acting as a real-time formative assessment. Arms hasthe distinct advantage of not requiring specialized equipment
or technical training.
The arms representation is a kinesthetic representation
where each student embodies a complex number, and a
group of students collaboratively represents quantum states.Researchers have demonstrated that student learning inphysics can be enhanced by integrating classroom activitiesthat provide physical experience with physics content, acti-vate sensorimotor brain systems, or support tactile knowl-
edge building.
18–22Many kinesthetic physics activities focus
on kinematics broadly,20–28but some have also been devel-
oped for other or more focused physics concepts: linear andangular momentum,19,27projectile motion,28electric ﬁeld,29
centripetal force,30astronomy,31–33Newton’s second law,34
torque,35solar cells,36energy,37–39mechanics,40electricity
and magnetism,41wave dynamics,42and more.43,44
In addition to being kinesthetic, the arms activities are
social active-engagement activities that are often at oddswith students’ expectations of a quantum mechanics class. Ameta-analysis of 225 studies on STEM classrooms foundthat active-engagement activities, like arms, improve student
performance.
45Additionally, activities that students do not
expect to happen in class often lead to a ripple of giggles,and a review of 40 years of studies found that infusing clas-ses with positive humor bolsters engagement and affect.
46
Finally, unlike many of the aforementioned, primarily 2D,
778 Am. J. Phys. 90(10), October 2022 http://aapt.org/ajp #2022 Published under an exclusive license by AAPT 778 04 October 2023 23:19:00
quantum mechanics representations, the arms representation
takes advantage of all three spatial dimensions, involves
multiple students, and uses time effectively to convey the
high dimensionality of the quantum systems.
In this paper, we present how we have used arms in a
junior-level, spins-ﬁrst quantum mechanics course to sup-
port an array of topics, starting with complex numbers,
then introducing two- and three-state systems, consideringtime-dependence, and, eventually, extending to approxi-
mate wavefunctions.47We begin with an introduction to
the arms representation (Sec. II). Then, we provide in-
depth descriptions of ﬁve activities (Sec. III). In Sec. IV,
we discuss how these activities are integrated into the
course and report informal observations of student engage-ment and learning with this method. We conclude thepaper with a discussion of the advantages of the arms
activities and provide implementation suggestions and
additional resources (Sec. V).
II. ARMS REPRESENTATION OVERVIEW
In its simplest form, the arms representation consists of
one person’s left arm embodying a complex number, as canbe seen in Fig. 1(a). The arms representation is essentially an
embodied Argand diagram, that is, a complex plane. The ori-
gin is at the shoulder; the real axis is parallel to the ground,with positive numbers in front of the person; the imaginary
axis is perpendicular to the ground with positive values
above the shoulder, and the left ﬁst then represents a com-plex number in the complex plane. The left arm is preferred
Fig. 1. Stick ﬁgure examples of how students can use the arms representation to represent various quantum mechanics phenomena. For (b)–(d), the stude nt in
pink (at the back) represents the jþizcoefﬁcient, and the student in blue represents the j/C0izcoefﬁcient. (a) A student representing z¼aþbiwith the arms
representation superimposed to an Argand diagram. (b) Two students working together to represent the spin-1/2 quantum state jWi¼1ﬃﬃ
2peip=4jþiz
þ1ﬃﬃ
2pe/C0ip=4j/C0iz. (c) Two students working together to represent a state with a relative phase of p=2. (d) Representative snapshots in time, of two students
working together to represent the spin 1/2 quantum state jWðtÞi ¼ e/C0iptðjþizþeip=2j/C0izÞevolving with time. (e) Inﬁnitely, many students inﬁnitesimally
close together using the arms representation to approximate a wavefunction in the position basis.
779 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 K. T. Hahn and E. Gire 779 04 October 2023 23:19:00
to the right, so that the person embodying the number sees a
correctly oriented Argand diagram.
Figure 1(a) outlines three of the symbolic notations we
use to represent complex numbers. The rectangular form rep-resents the complex number ( z) as the sum of a real compo-
nent ( a) and an imaginary component ( b). In the exponential
form, zis expressed as its norm ( jzj) multiplied by a complex
phase factor, e
ih, where his the angle that the complex num-
ber makes with the positive real axis. The polar form corre-sponds to z¼jzjcoshþijzjsinh. Each of these notations
can be related to the arms representation. The magnitude
(jzj) is represented by the length of the arm, his the angle
between the arm and horizontal, and a(i.e., jzjcosh) and b
(i.e.,jzjsinh) are the projections onto the real and imaginary
axes, respectively.
The arms representation is versatile and scalable. It can be
expanded to represent n-dimensional complex-valued vec-
tors by having npartners use their left arm to each represent
one of the components of the vector. Moreover, participants’arms can be rotated in time to represent time-dependentcomplex-valued vectors.
III. ACTIVITIES USING ARMS
In this section, we discuss some of the active-engagement
classroom activities we have designed using the arms repre-sentation. We present ﬁve instructor-guided activities: com-plex number (Sec. III A), spin-1 =2 quantum state (Sec. III B),
relative and overall phase (Sec. III C), time evolution (Sec.
III D), and going from spin to wavefunction (Sec. III E). For
each activity, we outline the goals and prerequisite knowl-
edge, and we discuss how we use the activity in our course.
We note that our descriptions of the activities make them
seem highly scripted. In fact, we advocate that the instructorbe ﬂexible and responsive to what students are doing in theclassroom. We consider the versions of the activities pre-sented here akin to platonic ideals rather than a record of
what occurred in any actual class. Our goals are to show the
general scope and sequence of each activity as well as sug-gest some prompts that instructors may use. We also providenotes about how activities can be modiﬁed and share anec-dotes from our classrooms. This paper is intended to givepotential adapters a ﬂavor of these activities, but we strongly
encourage educators to read the instructor’s guides on our
website for more detailed implementation guidance andupdates as we modify and reﬁne the activities.
48Tables I–V
outline the approximate duration and central goal for eachactivity. These durations reﬂect the time students spend
engaged in the arms representation. In Sec. IV, we discuss
how the activities can be integrated into a spins-ﬁrst quantummechanics course and provide insights into how studentsinteract and learn during these activities. This course utilizesMcIntyre’s quantum mechanics: A paradigms approach text-book.
4Also, an outline of the learning goals associated with
each activity can be found in the supplementary material.51
A. Complex number activity
During the complex number activity, each student is asked
to represent a series of complex numbers with their arm. We
introduce the arms representation to students for the ﬁrsttime at the beginning of the activity. Students should alreadybe familiar with complex numbers and Argand diagrams. Inour course, this activity is done during the ﬁrst few days ofclass. Figure 1(a) and Table Iprovide an overview of this
activity.
The instructor begins by reminding students of the rectan-
gular and exponential forms used to represent a complex
number, and by drawing an Argand diagram on the board.
Students are then asked to stand and face sideways, so that
their left shoulder points towards the board. By orienting
them in this way, when a student sweeps out the complex
plane with their arm, their complex plane aligns with the
Argand diagram on the board. The arms representation is
then introduced. The instructor begins by outlining the basics
of arms by acting out and describing the representation:
“Swing your left arm in a circle. You just swept
out the complex plane.”
“Put your left arm straight forward, parallel to the
ground. This is the positive, real axis.”
“Put your left arm straight upward, perpendicular
to the ground. This is the positive imaginary axis.”
The instructor then asks the students to practice sweeping
out the complex plane with their arm. We have found it nec-
essary to remind students to rotate their shoulder as their arm
goes behind them in order to avoid injury.
After introducing students to the basics of the arms repre-
sentation, the instructor asks them to represent a speciﬁc com-
plex number given in a form the students are familiar with,Table I. Overview of the complex number activity.
Central prompt Represent the complex number 1 þiwith your arms
Duration 10 minWhen used Week 1, after complex numbers in rectangular
and exponential forms have been introduced
Topics to review Complex numbers
Argand diagrams
Key concepts Forms of complex numbers
Arms representation
Related homework Circle trig complex
a
Phaseb
aFind this homework problem in the supplementary material.51
bFind this homework problem in the supplementary material.51
Table II. Overview of spin-1/2 quantum state activity.
Central prompt Working in pairs, represent
jWi¼1ﬃﬃ
2peip=4jþizþ1ﬃﬃ
2pe/C0ip=4j/C0iz
with your arms
Duration 5 minWhen used Week 2, after students have been introduced to
theS
zbasis, knowing that the expansion coefﬁ-
cients are complex numbers, and know how to
represent the eigenstates of SxandSyin the Sz
basis
Topics to review Arms representation basics
Complex-valued vectors
Key concepts Components of quantum state are complex
numbers
How to represent common spin-1/2 quantum
states
Textbook section (s) McIntyre 1.2 and 1.3Related homework Unknown spin-1/2 brief
a
aFind this homework problem in the supplementary material.51
780 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 K. T. Hahn and E. Gire 780 04 October 2023 23:19:00
often rectangular form, e.g., z¼1þias seen in Fig. 1(a).
Occasionally, the instructor will ask students to close their
eyes before representing the complex number, so that they will
not be inﬂuenced by what other students are doing.
As students represent complex numbers with arms, the
instructor leads a whole-class discussion highlighting some
geometric elements of complex numbers, such as the real and
imaginary components as projections onto the respective axes.When asked to represent a complex number with a magni-tude other than 1, students will often attempt to stretch their
arm (for jzj>1) or bend their elbow (for jzj<1). This
quickly leads to a discussion of how arms poorly representsthe norm of a complex number, since an arm has a ﬁxedlength. We encourage students to think of their arm as an
object of whatever length it needs to be. Although the arms
representation is not suited to illustrate the magnitude ofcomplex numbers, it allows students to depict approximate
phase angles. Note that bending one’s arm to account for the
magnitude jzjmakes these angles more difﬁcult to visualize.
Once students are comfortable representing a complex
number in arms from an instruction given in a familiar sym-bolic form, the instructor may use prompts given in other
symbolic forms such as rectangular, polar, and exponential
(see Fig. 1(a)). Each new symbolic form should include awhole-class discussion of the geometric elements. In partic-
ular, relating the phase angle to the exponent of the expo-nential form gives a tangible meaning to h. This can lead to
an additional discussion about how multiplying by a com-plex phase factor causes a complex number to rotate in the
complex plane. For this, the instructor should encourage
students to rotate their arm as hincreases and to practice
multiplying a given complex number by a complex phasefactor.
The complex number activity is also particularly well
suited for discussing complex conjugation. The instructorincites the students to represent a complex number and its
complex conjugate. The instructor then facilitates a discus-
sion of how, symbolically, complex conjugation correspondsto a change of sign in of the imaginary number, while, geo-metrically, it is a reﬂection over the real axis.
1. Noteworthy anecdotes about this activity
This activity typically involves a lot of giggling and a bit
of disruption to class. We view this as a good thing. Students
are taken off guard by the kinesthetic nature of the activity
that often falls outside the realm of what they consider“doing physics.” We have found that students adjust quickly,and that this activity helps set the tone for other activeengagement activities they encounter in our courses. Eventhe most stubborn students typically realize that our “silly”
activities are conceptually rigorous and buy into them. One
tip for building this buy-in is for the instructor to fully com-mit; let it be silly and fun while also focusing on theconcepts.
B. Spin-1 =2 quantum state activity
The spin-1 =2 quantum state activity builds off of the com-
plex number activity by having students work in pairs to rep-resent the complex-valued vectors of spin-1/2 quantum
states. Before this activity, students should be familiar with
quantum mechanical state vectors. They should also knowthat the eigenstates for the z-component of the spin of a
spin-1 =2 particle operator S
zarejþizandj/C0iz(and jþix
andj/C0ixare those of the Sxoperator, and jþiyandj/C0iy
are those of the Syoperator), and that ðjþiz;j/C0izÞ;
ðjþiy;j/C0iyÞ,o rðjþix;j/C0ixÞcan serve as a basis to express
any spin-1 =2 state. This can be extended to spin- nparticles
with a basis of 2 nþ1 eigenvectors. In particular, studentsTable III. Overview of relative and overall phase activity.
Central prompt Geometrically show the relative phase of jþix
in the Szbasis. Now multiply it by an overall
phase factor ep=4.
Duration 15 minWhen used Week 2, after students have had some practice
in representing spin-1/2 states in the S
zbasis and
have been introduced to the exponential form of
complex numbers, and can multiply complex
phase factors.
Topics to review Arms representation
How to multiply complex phase factors
Key concepts Relative phase deﬁnes a quantum stateTextbook section (s) McIntyre 1.2Related homework McIntyre 1.3
Phase 2
a
aFind this homework problem in the supplementary material.51
Table IV. Overview of time evolution activity.
Central prompt Show how the spin-1/2 state:
jWðtÞi ¼ e/C0ip=4ðÞ t1ﬃﬃ
2pjþizþ1ﬃﬃ
2peip=2ðÞj/C0iz/C16/C17
evolves with time.
Duration 10 min.When used Week 4, after students have seen the general
solution to the Schr €odinger equation for a time-
independent Hamiltonian.
Topics to review Arms representation
How quantum states are deﬁned
Key concepts Time-dependent overall phases preserve the
quantum state
Textbook section (s) McIntyre Chap. 3Related homework McIntyre 3.2
McIntyre 3.5
Frequency (McIntyre 3.12)
a
aFind this homework problem in the supplementary material.51Table V. Overview of going from spin to wavefunction activity.
Central prompt Using as many peers as you need, approximate a
quantum state represented in the position basis
using the arms representation.
Duration 10 minWhen used Week 5, after students have been introduced to
two-state and n-state quantum systems, and to
operators that correspond to observable
quantities.
Topics to review Arms representation
Position basis
Key concepts Position is continuous and uncountably inﬁniteTextbook section (s) McIntyre 5.2 and 5.3Related homework Wavefunctions
a
aFind this homework problem in the supplementary material.51
781 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 K. T. Hahn and E. Gire 781 04 October 2023 23:19:00
should know how to write the jþixandj/C0ixandjþiyand
j/C0iyeigenstates in the ( jþiz;j/C0iz) basis,
jþix¼1ﬃﬃﬃ
2pjþizþ1ﬃﬃﬃ
2pj/C0iz;jþiy¼1ﬃﬃﬃ
2pjþizþiﬃﬃﬃ
2pj/C0iz;
j/C0ix¼1ﬃﬃﬃ
2pjþiz/C01ﬃﬃﬃ
2pj/C0iz;j/C0iy¼1ﬃﬃﬃ
2pjþiz/C0iﬃﬃﬃ
2pj/C0iz:
We typically do this activity in week 2 of our ﬁve-week
intensive course. Figure 1(b) and Table IIprovide an over-
view of this activity.
For the spin-1 =2 quantum state activity, pairs of students
represent a spin quantum state, so that together they can rep-resent the complex coefﬁcient (i.e., probability amplitude) ofbothjþi
zandj/C0iz. Arms is used to emphasize that quantum
states are complex-valued vectors, and that multiple complexnumbers are needed to represent a single quantum state.
We ﬁnd that, at the beginning of each of the subsequent
activities, it is useful to remind students of the basics of the
representation. The instructor should then pair the students
and designate the student standing on the left as representingthejþi
zcomponent and the student on the right as represent-
ing the j/C0izcomponent. At the beginning of the course, our
students are most comfortable representing spin-1/2 states intheS
z-basis. A visualization of the spin-1 =2 quantum state
activity can be seen in Fig. 1(b).
To help reinforce what each student in the pair repre-
sents, we ﬁrst ask the pairs to represent the two eigenstates
ofSz, so that one of the students in each pair should display
0 with their arm. Next, the instructor prompts the pairsto represent jþi
x;j/C0ix;jþiy;j/C0iy;jþiz,a n d j/C0izin the Sz-
basis. This practice with different quantum states supple-ments the understanding developed with Stern–Gerlachexperiment simulations.
49As with the complex number
activity, the instructor asks students to translate states givenin various notations (bra-ket, matrix, and exponential) intothe arms representation and highlights the geometric rela-
tionships between the various components. We typically
reserve the discussion of the relative phase or anglebetween the students in each pair for subsequent activities,but it could be integrated here as well.
At the end of the spin-1 =2 quantum state activity, students
should understand that quantum states are complex-valuedvectors and should be able to represent a spin-1/2 state witharms and with multiple symbolic notations.
1. Noteworthy anecdotes about this activity
Students can be a bit perplexed when they have to repre-
sent zero for the jþi
zorj/C0izstates because their arm can-
not have zero size and hanging straight down means pure
imaginary. This can lead to some giggles and/or creativityabout how to handle this. We encourage this giggling andconsideration by students and let them represent zero eitherwith their arm relaxed to their side or scrunched in small attheir shoulder.
C. Relative and overall phase activity
In our course, the relative and overall phase activity fol-
lows quickly after the spin-1 =2 quantum state activity, and
they could be done consecutively, as one larger activity. In
this activity, the instructor facilitates a conversation aboutthe geometric interpretation of a quantum state andhighlights the convention of choosing the ﬁrst component to
be real and positive by factoring out an overall phase. Before
this activity, students should be able to multiply complex
phase factors. Figure 1(c)and Table IIIprovide an overview
of this activity.
We recommend reminding students that they will work in
pairs to represent a spin-1/2 state, and that the student on theleft represents the component of jþi
zand the student on the
right represents the component of j/C0iz.
The instructor begins the activity by asking students to
express a state and identify the relative phase angle, bothverbally and geometrically, as seen in Fig. 1(c). They should
then ask the students to multiply this state by a (constant)
overall phase, like e
ip=4. Students must think through what
multiplication means for the quantum state, and in what
direction to rotate their arms. Reminding students of any
rotations done in the complex number activity can help.
After rotating to accommodate the overall phase, the
instructor again invites the students to determine the relative
phase angle. Students are then prompted to discuss whetherthey are in a new quantum state and how they can tell if they
are. Through this line of inquiry and the geometric represen-
tations, students learn that a quantum spin-1 =2 state is
deﬁned by the magnitudes and relative phase angle of the
two coefﬁcients, and that an overall phase does not change
the quantum state. From here, a discussion about conven-
tional choices for phase factors ensues.
1. Noteworthy anecdotes about this activity
We have found that this activity beneﬁts from the geomet-
ric nature of arms as well as from the malleability of the rep-
resentation. Letting students rotate and move with their
partner to best represent the relative phase can be useful.
When asked to rotate or multiply the state, students willoccasionally rotate at the waist instead of, or in addition to,
rotating at the shoulder. This phenomenon typically signals a
misunderstanding of the representation, but it may also indi-cate confusion about the physical system.
D. Time evolution activity
The time evolution activity takes advantage of the kines-
thetic nature of the arms representation and especially of theability to use real-world time as a representational dimen-
sion. In this activity, students again work in pairs to represent
quantum spin-1 =2 states, but they are now requested to rotate
their arms at the rate indicated by a time-dependent complex
coefﬁcient they have to represent. Before the time evolution
activity, students should: (1) know that the solution to the
Schr€odinger equation for a time-independent Hamiltonian is
a linear combination of energy eigenstates, jE
ni, with time-
dependent coefﬁcients that depend on the energy, En,
jwðtÞi ¼P
ncnð0Þe/C0iEnt=/C22hjEni, where cnð0Þis the expansion
coefﬁcients of the state in the energy basis at time t¼0 and
/C22his the reduced Planck’s constant, (2) be comfortable multi-
plying complex phase factors, and (3) be familiar with both
overall and relative phases of a quantum state. We typicallydo the time evolution activity about two-thirds of the way
through our course, before discussing wavefunction notation.
Figure 1(d) and Table IVprovide an overview of this
activity.
When using arms to teach about time evolution, we ﬁnd it
is crucial to begin the activity with a review of key states
782 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 K. T. Hahn and E. Gire 782 04 October 2023 23:19:00
such as jþix;j/C0ix;jþiy, and j/C0iyin the Sz-basis. After stu-
dents have been re-familiarized with these states, the instruc-
tor asks them to represent a state, such as jþixin the Szbasis
with an arbitrary overall phase. The instructor guides the stu-
dents through a quick review of what the relative phase is and
reminds them that the relative phase determines the state
(along with the norms of the expansion coefﬁcients).
After this initial exercise, the instructor initiates a discus-
sion of stationary states. The instructor asks students to rep-
resent a state, such as jþix, by writing the state on the board.
Then, the instructor multiplies the state by a time-dependentoverall phase, e
ixtjþix, and asks the students to represent
this state with their arms.
Students typically spend a few minutes discussing how
to represent the time component and which way to rotate
their arms (counterclockwise for positive x). After most
students have ﬁgured out how the time evolution part of
arms works, the instructor asks the students to start over
representing their state, so that the whole class begins rep-resenting, and rotating, together. Once they have been
rotating for a while, the instructor asks them to pause their
rotation and share what state they are in, or what the rela-
tive phase is. Snapshots of this process can be seen in
Fig. 1(d). A whole class discussion ensues about how the
vector itself changes with time (i.e., the overall phase
changes), but the state and any associated measurement orprobability does not (i.e., the relative phase does not
change). The term “stationary states” is introduced to
describe this phenomenon.
The instructor discusses that if the initial state of the quan-
tum system is an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian, the time-
dependent complex phase factor acts as an overall phase, and
the state is a stationary state. For example, in a case where
the Hamiltonian is proportional to the ^S
xspin component
operator (e.g., a spin-1/2 particle in a uniform magnetic ﬁeld
pointing in the xdirection), the jþixis an energy eigenstate
and, therefore, a stationary state.
The instructor then initiates a discussion of more general
time evolution. The instructor asks the students, what kind of
motion would result in a state that changes with time. The
whole-class discussion should be guided to come to the
agreement that each student in the vector pair would need tobe rotating at a different rate or in a different direction.
Mathematically, that would correspond to a quantum vector
with different time dependent coefﬁcients for each basis
state. Students should then be asked to represent a speciﬁc
time-dependent, non-stationary quantum state in the form,
jWðtÞi ¼ e
ix1tcþjþizþeix2tc/C0j/C0iz. The instructor then
invites the students to summarize why a state changes with
time and encourages them to articulate that if the relative
phase changes, then the state changes.
In the ﬁnal sequence of this activity, the instructor sup-
poses that each student pair, initially representing jþixin the
ðjþiz;j/C0izÞbasis, is subjected to a Hamiltonian that is pro-
portional to the spin component operator ^Sz, as is the case of
a spin-1 =2 system in a z-oriented magnetic ﬁeld. The instruc-
tor leads a discussion about how, in this case, the two
students in the pair represent the two energy eigenstates,
i.e., the eigenstates of ^Sz;jþizandj/C0iz. Therefore, to repre-
sent the time-evolved state, each person needs to enact
the unique time-dependent phase factor of the eigenstate
they symbolize. The time dependence can be expressed as
(if starting in the state jþixatt¼0)jwðtÞi ¼1ﬃﬃﬃ
2pe/C0i/C22ht=2jþizþ1ﬃﬃﬃ
2peþi/C22ht=2j/C0iz:
This is an opportunity to emphasize that the energy-
dependent complex phase factor (here e7i/C22ht=2) is applied to
the corresponding eigenstate of the Hamiltonian, here j6iz.
One must be sure that the initial state is expressed in thebasis of energy eigenstates before multiplying each compo-nent by the relevant time-dependent phase factors to obtainthe time-dependent state.
The students then act out this time dependence. To empha-
size how the state changes, the instructor can ask students topause at key conﬁgurations that represent jþi
x;j/C0ix;
jþiy;j/C0iy, the states reviewed at the beginning of the activ-
ity. The students then identify that the state rotates through
jþix;jþiy;j/C0ix;j/C0iy, which can be conceptualized as a
spin vector precessing around the z-axis in the xy-plane.
1. Noteworthy anecdotes about this activity
We have tried structuring this activity to prompt students
to represent systems where the state evolved with time at thebeginning of the activity (rather than starting with stationarystates) and observed a student who stood still, looking per-plexed. When questioned, the student asked “How can it staythe same state, if the arms move in opposite directions?” Theinstructor reinforced this idea that the arms, each embodyinggiven eigenstates, indeed, rotates independently, resulting ina change in the relative phase, and, thus, the state was notconserved. We have found that inverting the prompts isadvantageous for building to the idea of a state changingwith time, rather than confronting it head-on as we used to.However, either prompt order guides the students to theah-ha moment, confronting the cognitive dissonance, thattime evolution of systems can change the quantum state.
E. Going from spin to wavefunction activity
The going from spin to wavefunction arms activity seeks
to help students transition their thinking from discrete spinsystems to continuous systems that can be described withwavefunctions. Before the going from spin to wavefunctionactivity, students should be familiar with spin-1 and spin-nsystems, understanding that observables are represented byoperators, and that the eigenstates of operators form a basis.We typically do this activity in the last week of the course,but it could also be done before the time evolution activity,
if desired. Figure 1(e) and Table Vprovide an overview of
this activity.
We encourage beginning the new activity with a review of
bra-ket notation, probability histograms of measurement out-comes, and matrix notation. One way to do this is to ask stu-dents to represent a speciﬁc spin-1/2 state, say in theðjþi
z;j/C0izÞbasis, given in the bra-ket notation, with their
arms, then have them draw the probability histogram of thepossible outcomes of the measurement of S
zfor that state,
and write the state in matrix notation.
Once students have successfully expressed a spin-1/2 state
with arms, bra-ket notation, probability histograms, andmatrix notation, the conversation shifts to spin-1 states. Theinstructor asks the class “What would we have to do in orderto represent a spin-1 state with the arms representation?”The students will eventually suggest adding a third person(or arm) to the initial pair of students. Students should then
783 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 K. T. Hahn and E. Gire 783 04 October 2023 23:19:00
be regrouped into triads, with each student representing one
of the three basis kets ( j1iz;j0iz;j/C01iz). Now in triads, stu-
dents are asked to translate from bra-ket notation to the arms
representation, then draw probability histograms of the mea-
surement results of Sz, and write the state in matrix notation.50
The process of considering a higher-state system, translat-
ing bra-ket notation to arms, probability histograms, andmatrix notation, is repeated for at least one higher-state dis-
crete system. For example, groups of seven students would
represent a spin-3 system. After progressing through discretestates with an increasing number of basis kets, the instructor
asks the students to imagine a particle where the position is
the observable of interest. Students are asked how they could
use the arms representation to enact the basis that would
allow us to measure position, the position basis. The instruc-tor encourages all of the students to work together to repre-
sent a state in the position basis. They then solicit ideas
about how many students we need and where they shouldstand. The discussion continues until a consensus of needing
an inﬁnite number of people standing inﬁnitely close
together is reached. A visualization of this can be seen in
Fig.1(e).
The instructor then leads a discussion about the similari-
ties and differences between probability amplitudes in thespin case and a wavefunction (i.e., a probability density
amplitude). After representing a state in the position basis
with the arms representation, the instructor works with thestudents to create a probability histogram of this state, as
they did with spin measurements. Students determine that
this histogram is a function of xand depicts the probability
density. The instructor then introduces the parallel between
spin states (where probabilities are the norm squared of prob-ability amplitudes) and wavefunctions (where the probability
density is the norm squared of the probability density ampli-
tude, i.e., the wavefunction or the complex function the stu-dents had just been representing with their arms).
Next, the class considers how to represent this state in
matrix notation, as they did with spin systems, concluding that,for a wavefunction, an inﬁnitely long column matrix is needed,
with each entry corresponding to a position eigenstate. The dis-
cussion should include how even writing down values for thismatrix is an approximation of the state itself. Just like with the
arms representation for this system, between any two entries
you write down, there are inﬁnitely more entries. The instruc-
tor then frames this as a motivation for wavefunction form,
which can represent all of the entries at once.
The instructor encourages a discussion of the parameters
of a position basis; how the basis, even when the region is
bounded, has an uncountably inﬁnite number of basis kets.
Additionally, the students are encouraged to think aboutwhat an individual position basis ket would look like; we
have found drawing parallels to spiky delta functions to be
useful. At this stage, the instructor should emphasize some
differences between wavefunctions and probability ampli-
tudes, including that squaring the norm of these quantitiesleads to probability densities and probabilities, respectively,
and that, therefore, a wavefunction and a probability ampli-
tude have different physical dimensions. We ﬁnd it helpfulto draw a parallel between this situation and other discrete
vs. continuous situations students might be familiar with,
like the relationship between discrete charges and charge
density. The activity wraps up with a review of the main
learning goals outlined in the supplementary material.
511. Noteworthy anecdotes about this activity
This activity is most powerful if all students engage in rep-
resenting one state together. The probability density histo-
gram is also particularly potent in connecting the arms
representation to wavefunction notation. We strongly urgetaking the time to re-represent the student’s 3D arms wave-function as a 2D probability density histogram.
IV. EMBEDDING IN INSTRUCTION
We typically weave these ﬁve activities throughout our
ﬁve-week intensive quantum fundamentals course. An exam-ple schedule of the quantum fundamentals course can befound in the supplementary material.
51Throughout the
course, we leverage the advantages of the arms representa-tion to support key conceptual understandings. The featuresof arms highlight key physics concepts: for example, the spa-tial separation of the basis kets reinforces the complex nature
of each coefﬁcient. Geometric relations between arms high-
light the signiﬁcance of relative phase in deﬁning a state.The ability to enact the temporal changes of time-evolutionhelps students to understand stationary states. Enacting thetransition from discrete to continuous reinforces the similari-ties between discrete spin states and continuous positionwavefunctions and provides conceptual anchors for learningabout wavefunctions. The arms activities are not the core of
the curriculum but rather one tool in our instructor’s tool box
to support student reasoning.
Due to their kinesthetic nature, students are unable to take
notes during the activities. At ﬁrst, this can cause some dis-comfort for some students, but we have found that studentsquickly develop skills to reﬂect on their learning in theirnotes after an activity, supporting both the physics contentand students’ metacognitive skills. This reﬂection is rein-forced through whole-class wrap-up discussions after each
activity. These discussions/mini-lectures summarize the
main points of the activity and provide a space for studentsto take notes if they choose. Additionally, these activitiestend to be easy for students to remember, even withoutextensive notes. This is a particularly interesting aspect ofactivities-paired curricula: the activities continually buildupon the previously learnt physics concepts, so that studentsrarely need detailed notes to solidify their understanding of
physics concepts. Indeed, the concepts presented with the
arms activities are continually reinforced throughout thecourse through later arms activities, small-group activities,homework, and exams.
A ﬁnal note on embedding the arms activities in instruc-
tion is that it is crucial that we do not force students to partic-ipate in activities. Often, a student or two will sit out of anygiven activity, including the kinesthetic ones. For the armsactivities, we often begin with, “If it is physically safe for
you to do so, please move your arm in a circle.” We aim
to normalize the idea that not everyone does everything,to make it easier for people to decide for themselves when toparticipate.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The novelty of the arms representation comes from its sim-
plicity. The lack of specialized equipment and training meansarms has a low barrier of entry for instructors and studentsalike. Arms is easily manipulable and provides geometric
784 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 K. T. Hahn and E. Gire 784 04 October 2023 23:19:00
insights that are difﬁcult to convey in two-dimensional repre-
sentations. We have shown how the various activities can bol-
ster students’ understanding of quantum mechanics and help
them gain a physical intuition of the various phenomena. Thekinesthetic nature of the activities brings fun and engagement
to quantum mechanics courses. This paper outlines a few class-
room tested activities that use the arms representation. Weenvision many more possibilities for integrating the arms rep-
resentation into our quantum mechanics courses, which will be
the subject of future publications.
The arms representation does have some inherent limita-
tions. For example, arms are a ﬁxed length, and, conse-
quently, the arms representation does not convey the norm of
a complex number. Additionally, while the arms representa-tion does not require specialized equipment, it does require
signiﬁcant space, multiple people, and high participant
mobility. We have explored options for representing length,such as using tinker toys rather than arms to represent the
complex numbers, but found that the added beneﬁt is not
worth the cost, logistical constraints, and removed embodi-ment that comes with adding equipment. We have alsoexplored alternative modes of engagement for students with
mobility restrictions, such as using equipment rather than
their arm: tinker toys, pens, and meter sticks. These alterna-tives may work for many students, but, if not, we recom-
mend grouping those students with students who can act out
the representation and encourage their participation in thegroup discussions about how to move. Despite these limita-
tions, we have found the arms representation and activities to
support students’ conceptual understanding, and we hope tosee them taken up by other quantum mechanics instructors.
Beyond the professional reﬂections offered here, a qualita-
tive analysis of student reasoning and experiences with theseactivities is underway, though the results from this analysis
are beyond the scope of this manuscript. Support for adopt-
ing these and other arms activities may be found on ourwebsite.
48
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Paradigms @ OSU group, particularly Dr. Corinne
Manogue and Dr. Elizabeth Gire, developed and reﬁned the
arms representation and activities. Additional reﬁnement of
ideas for this article came from the OSUPER group,particularly David Roundy, Christian Solorio, Dustin Treece,
and Maggie Greenwood. This material is based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation under GrantNo. DUE-1836604.
a)Electronic mail: kelby.hahn@oregonstate.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-3067-
5573.
b)Electronic mail: giree@oregonstate.edu, ORCID: 0000-0002-6126-7863.
1Tong Wan, Paul Emigh, and Peter Shaffer, “Student understanding of themeasurable effects of relative phases in superposition states,” in Physics
Education Research Conference 2017, PER Conference (PERC
Proceedings, Cincinnati, OH, 2017), pp. 420–423.
2Ricardo Karam, “Why are complex numbers needed in quantum mechan-
ics? Some answers for the introductory level,” Am. J. Phys. 88(1), 39–45
(2020).
3John S. Townsend, A Modern Approach to Quantum Mechanics
(University Science Books, Sausalito, CA, 2000).
4David H. McIntyre, Corinne A. Manogue, and Janet Tate, Quantum
Mechanics: A Paradigms Approach (Pearson, New York, 2012).
5Mark Beck, Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Experiment (Oxford U. P.,
Oxford, 2012).6William F. Courtney, Lucas B. Vieira, Paul S. Julienne, and James K.Freericks, “Incorporating the Stern–Gerlach delayed-choice quantumeraser into the undergraduate quantum mechanics curriculum,” Am. J.
Phys. 88(4), 298–307 (2020).
7Emily M. Smith, Justyna Zwolak, and Corinne Manogue, “Student difﬁ-
culties with complex numbers,” in Physics Education Research
Conference, PER Part of the PER Conference Series (PERC Proceedings,
College Park, MD, 2015), pp. 311–314.
8M. Belloni and W. Christian, “Physlets for quantum mechanics,” Comput.
Sci. Eng. 5(1), 90–97 (2003).
9Gina Passante and Antje Kohnle, “Enhancing student visual understanding
of the time evolution of quantum systems,” Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res.
15(1), 010110 (2019).
10John R. Hiller, Ian D. Johnston, and Daniel F. Styer, Quantum Mechanics
Simulations: The Consortium for Upper-Level Physics Software (Wiley,
New York, 1995).
11Antje Kohnle, Donatella Cassettari, Tom J. Edwards, Callum Ferguson,Alastair D. Gillies, Christopher A. Hooley, Natalia Korolkova, JosephLlama, and Bruce D. Sinclair, “A new multimedia resource for teachingquantum mechanics concepts,” Am. J. Phys. 80(2), 148–153 (2012).
12S. B. McKagan, K. K. Perkins, M. Dubson, C. Malley, S. Reid, R.
LeMaster, and C. E. Wieman, “Developing and researching PhET simula-tions for teaching quantum mechanics,” Am. J. Phys. 76(4), 406–417
(2008).
13Abraham Goldberg, Harry M. Schey, and Judah L. Schwartz, “Computer-generated motion pictures of one-dimensional quantum-mechanical trans-mission and reﬂection phenomena,” Am. J. Phys. 35(3), 177–186 (1967).
14Hunter Close, Catherine Schiber, Eleanor Close, and Dave Donnelly,
“Students’ dynamic geometric reasoning about quantum spin-1/2 states,”inPhysics Education Research Conference (PERC Proceedings, Portland,
OR, 2013), pp. 93–96.
15Siegmund Brandt and Hans Dieter Dahmen, The Picture Book of Quantum
Mechanics (Springer, New York, 2012).
16Bernd Thaller, Visual Quantum Mechanics: Selected Topics with
Computer-Generated Animations of Quantum-Mechanical Phenomena(Springer, New York, 2002).
17Corinne Manogue, Elizabeth Gire, and David Roundy, “Tangible meta-phors,” in Physics Education Research Conference (PERC Proceedings,
Portland, OR, 2013), pp. 27–30.
18J. Solomon, R. Bevan, A. Frost, H. Reynolds, M. Summers, and C.Zimmerman, “Can pupils learn through their own movements? A study ofthe use of a motion sensor interface,” Phys. Educ. 26(6), 345–349 (1991).
19Carly Kontra, Daniel J. Lyons, Susan M. Fischer, and Sian L. Beilock,
“Physical experience enhances science learning,” Psychol. Sci. 26(6),
737–749 (2015).
20Carolien Duijzer, Marja Van den Heuvel-Panhuizen, Michiel Veldhuis,Michiel Doorman, and Paul Leseman, “Embodied learning environmentsfor graphing motion: A systematic literature review,” Educ. Psychol. Rev.
31(3), 597–629 (2019).
21William Struck and Randy Yerrick, “The effect of data acquisition-
probeware and digital video analysis on accurate graphical representationof kinetics in a high school physics class,” J. Sci. Educ. Technol. 19(2),
199–211 (2010).
22Robert J. Beichner, “The effect of simultaneous motion presentation andgraph generation in a kinematics lab” J. Res. Sci. Teach. 27(8), 803–815
(1990).
23Zachary Dale, Paul R. DeStefano, Lori Shaaban, Cora Siebert, and RalfWidenhorn, “A step forward in kinesthetic activities for teaching kinemat-ics in introductory physics,” Am. J. Phys. 88(10), 825–830 (2020).
24Janice L. Anderson and Steven D. Wall, “Kinecting physics:
Conceptualization of motion through visualization and embodiment,”J. Sci. Educ. Technol. 25(2), 161–173 (2016).
25Heather Brasell, “The effect of real-time laboratory graphing on learning
graphic representations of distance and velocity,” J. Res. Sci. Teach.
24(4), 385–395 (1987).
26Insook Han and John B. Black, “Incorporating haptic feedback in simula-
tion for learning physics,” Comput. Educ. 57(4), 2281–2290 (2011).
27Elliot Mylott, Justin Dunlap, Lester Lampert, and Ralf Widenhorn,
“Kinesthetic activities for the classroom,” Phys. Teach. 52(9), 525–528 (2014).
28Brooke A. Whitworth, Jennifer L. Chiu, and Randy L. Bell, “Kinesthetic
investigations in the physics classroom,” Phys. Teach. 52(2), 91–93 (2014).
29Mina C. Johnson-Glenberg and Colleen Megowan-Romanowicz,
“Embodied science and mixed reality: How gesture and motion captureaffect physics education,” Cognit. Res. 2(1), 24 (2017).
785 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 K. T. Hahn and E. Gire 785 04 October 2023 23:19:00
30Mina C. Johnson-Glenberg, Colleen Megowan-Romanowicz, David A.
Birchﬁeld, and Caroline Savio-Ramos, “Effects of embodied learning and
digital platform on the retention of physics content: Centripetal force,”
Front. Psychol. 7, 1819 (2016).
31Robb Lindgren, Michael Tscholl, and J. Moshell, MEteor: Developing
Physics Concepts Through Body-based Interaction With a Mixed Reality
Simulation (PERC Proceeedings, 2014), pp. 217–220.
32Bor Gregorcic and Jesper Haglund, “Conceptual blending as an interpretive
lens for student engagement with technology: Exploring celestial motion on
an interactive whiteboard,” Res. Sci. Educ. 51(2), 235–275 (2021).
33Cherilynn A. Morrow, “Kinesthetic astronomy: The sky time lesson,”
Phys. Teach. 38(4), 252–253 (2000).
34Vincent P. Coletta, Josh Bernardin, Daniel Pascoe, and Anatol Hoemke,
“Feeling Newton’s second law,” Phys. Teach. 57(2), 88–90 (2019).
35Padma Ganesh, “Connecting torque and friction using tactile learning
activities,” Phys. Teach. 58(9), 659–662 (2020).
36A. J. Richards and Eugenia Etkina, “Kinaesthetic learning activities and
learning about solar cells,” Phys. Educ. 48(5), 578–585 (2013).
37Hunter G. Close and Rachel E. Scherr, “Enacting conceptual metaphor
through blending: Learning activities embodying the substance metaphor
for energy,” Int. J. Sci. Educ. 37(5–6), 839–866 (2015).
38Abigail Daane, Lindsay Wells, and Rachel Scherr, “Energy theater,” Phys.
Teach. 52, 020105 (2014).
39Cecily Criminale, Neda Esfan, and Mariam Mathew, “Energy bowlerama,”
Sci. Scope 30(2), 30–33 (2006), http://www.jstor.org/stable/43181012 .
40A. J. Richards, “Teaching mechanics using kinesthetic learning activities,”
Phys. Teach. 57(1), 35–38 (2019).41A. J. Richards, “Teaching electricity and magnetism using kinesthetic
learning activities,” Phys. Teach. 58(8), 572–576 (2020).
42Panagiotis Pantidos and Stamatis Patapis, “Kinesthetic transverse wave
demonstration,” Phys. Teach. 43(6), 344–345 (2005).
43Paradigms @ osu kinesthetic activities.
44Carole Escobar, “Amusement park physics,” Phys. Teach. 28(7), 446–453
(1990).
45Scott Freeman, Sarah L. Eddy, Miles McDonough, Michelle K. Smith,Nnadozie Okoroafor, Hannah Jordt, and Mary Pat Wenderoth, “Active
learning increases student performance in science, engineering, and math-
ematics,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111(23), 8410–8415 (2014).
46John A. Banas, Norah Dunbar, Dariela Rodriguez, and Shr-Jie Liu, “A
review of humor in educational settings: Four decades of research,”
Commun. Educ. 60(1), 115–144 (2011).
47Paul J. Emigh, Elizabeth Gire, Corinne A. Manogue, Gina Passante, and
Peter S. Shaffer, “Research-based quantum instruction: Paradigms and
tutorials,” Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 16(2), 020156 (2020).
48OSUPER, <Paradigms@osu >, 2019.
49David McIntyre, Spins java homepage, http://sites.science.oregonstate.
edu/~mcintyre/ph425/spins/index.html .
50These probability histograms are similar to those in McIntyre’s textbook,
with each of the possible measurement result presented on the horizontal
axis, and then bars representing the probability of that measurement result.
See Fig. 1.9 in McIntyre for an example (Ref. 4, p. 16).
51See supplementary material at https://www.scitation.org/doi/suppl/
10.1119/5.0073946 for a sample schedule for Quantum Fundamentals,
Example homework problems, and a list of Arms activity learning goals.
786 Am. J. Phys., Vol. 90, No. 10, October 2022 K. T. Hahn and E. Gire 786 04 October 2023 23:19:00
