X: Construction of a desingularization of a variety X may not produce centers of blowings up that are smooth subvarieties of X. Many constructions of a desingularization of an abstract variety X proceed by locally embedding X in a smooth variety W, considering its ideal in W and computing a canonical desingularization of this ideal. The desingularization of ideals uses the order of the ideal as a measure of how singular is the ideal. The desingularization of the ideal can be made such that one can justify that the local centers patch together to give global centers. This method leads to a proof that is relatively simpler to present, compared to Hironaka's original proof, which uses the Hilbert-Samuel function as the measure of how bad singularities are. For example, the proofs in Villamayor (1992) harvtxt error: no target: CITEREFVillamayor1992 (help), Encinas & Villamayor (1998), Encinas & Hauser (2002), and Kollár (2007) use this idea. However, this method only ensures centers of blowings up that are regular in W. The following example shows that this method can produce centers that have non-smooth intersections with the (strict transform of) X.[3] Therefore, the resulting desingularization, when restricted to the abstract variety X, is not obtained by blowing up regular subvarieties of X. Let X be the subvariety of the four-dimensional affine plane, with coordinates x,y,z,w, generated by y2-x3 and x4+xz2-w3. The canonical desingularization of the ideal with these generators would blow up the center C0 given by x=y=z=w=0. The transform of the ideal in the x-chart if generated by x-y2 and y2(y2+z2-w3). The next center of blowing up C1 is given by x=y=0. However, the strict transform of X is X1, which is generated by x-y2 and y2+z2-w3. This means that the intersection of C1 and X1 is given by x=y=0 and z2-w3=0, which is not regular. To produce centers of blowings up that are regular subvarieties of X stronger proofs use the Hilbert-Samuel function of the local rings of X rather than the order of its ideal in the local embedding in W.[4] Other variants of resolutions of