Proof: The theorem is proved in two steps. First, if a partial order does not compare x and y,, it can be extended by first adding the pair (x,y)(x,y) and then performing the transitive closure, and second, since this operation generates an ordering that strictly contains the original one and can be applied to all pairs of incomparable elements, there exists a relation in which all pairs of elements have been made comparable. The first step is proved as a preliminary lemma, in which a partial order where a pair of elements x and y are incomparable is changed to make them comparable. This is done by first adding the pair xRy to the relation, which may result in a non-transitive relation, and then restoring transitivity by adding all pairs qRp such that qRxandyRp.andyRp. This is done on a single pair of incomparable elements x and y,, and produces a relation that is still reflexive, antisymmetric and transitive and that strictly contains the original one. Next it is shown that the poset of partial orders containing R,, ordered by inclusion, has a maximal element. The existence of such a maximal element is proved by applying Zorn's lemma to this poset. A chain in this poset is a set of relations containing R such that given any two of these relations, one is contained in the other. To apply Zorn's lemma, it must be shown that every chain has an upper bound in the poset. Let Cğ’ be such a chain, and it remains to show that the union of its elements, â‹ƒC,â‹ƒğ’, is an upper bound for Cğ’ which is in the poset: Cğ’ contains the original relation R since every element of Cğ’ is a partial order containing R.. Next, it is shown that â‹ƒCâ‹ƒğ’ is a transitive relation. Suppose that (x,y)(x,y) and (y,z)(y,z) are in â‹ƒC,â‹ƒğ’, so that there exist S,TâˆˆC,Tâˆˆğ’ such that (x,y)âˆˆSand(y,z)âˆˆT.(x,y)and(y,z). Since Cğ’ is a chain, either SâŠ†TorTâŠ†S.orT. Suppose SâŠ†T;; the argument for when TâŠ†S is similar. Then (x,y)âˆˆT.(x,y). Since all relations produced by our process are transitive, (x,z)(x,z) is in T and therefore also in â‹ƒC.â‹ƒğ’. Similarly, it can be shown that â‹ƒCâ‹ƒğ’ is antisymmetric. Therefore by Zorn's lemma the set of partial orders containing R has a maximal element Q,, and it remains only to show that Q is total. Indeed if Q had a pair of incomparable elements then it is possible to apply the process of the first step to it, leading to another strict partial order that contains R and strictly contains Q,, contradicting that Q is maximal. Q is therefore a total order containing R,, completing the proof. Other extension