case: The way of applying recursively the method of the Newton polygon has been described precedingly. As each application of the method may increase, in the ramified case, the denominators of exponents (valuations), it remains to prove that one reaches the regular case after a finite number of iterations (otherwise the denominators of the exponents of the resulting series would not be bounded, and this series would not be a Puiseux series. By the way, it will also be proved that one gets exactly as many Puiseux series solutions as expected, that is the degree of P(y)(y) in y. Without loss of generality, one can suppose that P(0)≠0,(0)≠0, that is, a0≠0._0≠0. Indeed, each factor y of P(y)(y) provides a solution that is the zero Puiseux series, and such factors can be factored out. As the characteristic is supposed to be zero, one can also suppose that P(y)(y) is a square-free polynomial, that is that the solutions of P(y)=0(y)=0 are all different. Indeed, the square-free factorization uses only the operations of the field of coefficients for factoring P(y)(y) into square-free factors than can be solved separately. (The hypothesis of characteristic zero is needed, since, in characteristic p, the square-free decomposition can provide irreducible factors, such as yp−x,^p-x, that have multiple roots over an algebraic extension.) In this context, one defines the length of an edge of a Newton polygon as the difference of the abscissas of its end points. The length of a polygon is the sum of the lengths of its edges. With the hypothesis P(0)≠0,(0)≠0, the length of the Newton polygon of P is its degree in y, that is the number of its roots. The length of an edge of the Newton polygon is the number of roots of a given valuation. This number equals the degree of the previously defined polynomial χ(x).χ(x). The ramified case corresponds thus to two (or more) solutions that have the same initial term(s). As these solutions must be distinct (square-free hypothesis), they must be distinguished after a finite number of iterations. That is, one gets eventually a polynomial χ(x)χ(x) that is square free, and the computation can continue as in the regular case for each root of χ(x).χ(x). As the iteration of the regular case does not increase the denominators of the exponents, This shows that the method provides all solutions as Puiseux series, that is, that the field of Puiseux series over the complex numbersis an algebraically closed field that contains the univariate polynomial ring with complex coefficients. Failure in positive