contexts: Already at its earliest stages, it was known that K could be replaced by any commutative ring, provided that L is a free K-module, i.e., has a basis as above. To extend to the case when L is no longer a free K-module, one needs to make a reformulation that does not use bases. This involves replacing the space of monomials in some basis with the symmetric algebra, S(L), on L. In the case that K contains the field of rational numbers, one can consider the natural map from S(L) to U(L), sending a monomial v1v2⋯vn_1v_2_n. for vi∈L_i, to the element 1n!∑σ∈Snvσ(1)vσ(2)⋯vσ(n).1/n!∑_σ_nv_σ(1)v_σ(2)_σ(n). Then, one has the theorem that this map is an isomorphism of K-modules. Still more generally and naturally, one can consider U(L) as a filtered algebra, equipped with the filtration given by specifying that v1v2⋯vn_1v_2_n lies in filtered degree ≤n. The map L → U(L) of K-modules canonically extends to a map T(L) → U(L) of algebras, where T(L) is the tensor algebra on L (for example, by the universal property of tensor algebras), and this is a filtered map equipping T(L) with the filtration putting L in degree one (actually, T(L) is graded). Then, passing to the associated graded, one gets a canonical morphism T(L) → grU(L), which kills the elements vw - wv for v, w ∈ L, and hence descends to a canonical morphism S(L) → grU(L). Then, the (graded) PBW theorem can be reformulated as the statement that, under certain hypotheses, this final morphism is an isomorphism of commutative algebras. This is not true for all K and L (see, for example, the last section of Cohn's 1961 paper), but is true in many cases. These include the aforementioned ones, where either L is a free K-module (hence whenever K is a field), or K contains the field of rational numbers. More generally, the PBW theorem as formulated above extends to cases such as where (1) L is a flat K-module, (2) L is torsion-free as an abelian group, (3) L is a direct sum of cyclic modules (or all its localizations at prime ideals of K have this property), or (4) K is a Dedekind domain. See, for example, the 1969 paper by Higgins for these statements. Finally, it is worth noting that, in some of these cases, one also obtains the stronger statement that the canonical morphism S(L) → grU(L) lifts to a K-module isomorphism S(L) → U(L), without taking associated graded. This is true in the first cases mentioned, where L is a free K-module, or K contains the field of rational numbers, using the construction outlined here (in fact, the result is a coalgebra isomorphism, and not merely a K-module isomorphism, equipping both S(L) and U(L) with their natural coalgebra structures such that Δ(v)=v⊗1+1⊗vΔ(v)=v⊗1+1 for v ∈ L). This stronger statement, however, might not extend to all of the cases in the previous paragraph. History of the