Formulation: The idea is to find the correct replacement for the Lefschetz number, which in the classical result is an integer counting the correct contribution of a fixed point of a smooth mapping f:M→M.. Intuitively, the fixed points are the points of intersection of the graph of f with the diagonal (graph of the identity mapping) in M×M, and the Lefschetz number thereby becomes an intersection number. The Atiyah–Bott theorem is an equation in which the LHS must be the outcome of a global topological (homological) calculation, and the RHS a sum of the local contributions at fixed points of f. Counting codimensions in M×M, a transversality assumption for the graph of f and the diagonal should ensure that the fixed point set is zero-dimensional. Assuming M a closed manifold should ensure then that the set of intersections is finite, yielding a finite summation as the RHS of the expected formula. Further data needed relates to the elliptic complex of vector bundles Ej_j, namely a bundle map φj:f−1(Ej)→Ejφ_j^-1(E_j)_j for each j, such that the resulting maps on sections give rise to an endomorphism of an elliptic complex T. Such an endomorphism T has Lefschetz number L(T),(T), which by definition is the alternating sum of its traces on each graded part of the homology of the elliptic complex. The form of the theorem is then L(T)=∑x(∑j(−1)jtraceφj,x)/δ(x).(T)=∑_x(∑_j(-1)^jtrace φ_j,x)/δ(x). Here trace φj,xφ_j,x means the trace of φjφ_j at a fixed point x of f, and δ(x)δ(x) is the determinant of the endomorphism I−Df-Df at x, with Df the derivative of f (the non-vanishing of this is a consequence of transversality). The outer summation is over the fixed points x, and the inner summation over the index j in the elliptic complex. Specializing the Atiyah–Bott theorem to the de Rham complex of smooth differential forms yields the original Lefschetz fixed-point formula. A famous application of the Atiyah–Bott theorem is a simple proof of the Weyl character formula in the theory of Lie groups.[clarification needed]