Proof: Induction step for proof of Fáry's theorem. One way of proving Fáry's theorem is to use mathematical induction.[1] Let G be a simple plane graph with n vertices; we may add edges if necessary so that G is a maximally plane graph. If n < 3, the result is trivial. If n ≥ 3, then all faces of G must be triangles, as we could add an edge into any face with more sides while preserving planarity, contradicting the assumption of maximal planarity. Choose some three vertices a, b, c forming a triangular face of G. We prove by induction on n that there exists a straight-line combinatorially isomorphic re-embedding of G in which triangle abc is the outer face of the embedding. (Combinatorially isomorphic means that the vertices, edges, and faces in the new drawing can be made to correspond to those in the old drawing, such that all incidences between edges, vertices, and faces—not just between vertices and edges—are preserved.) As a base case, the result is trivial when n = 3 and a, b and c are the only vertices in G. Thus, we may assume that n ≥ 4. By Euler's formula for planar graphs, G has 3n − 6 edges; equivalently, if one defines the deficiency of a vertex v in G to be 6 − deg(v), the sum of the deficiencies is 12. Since G has at least four vertices and all faces of G are triangles, it follows that every vertex in G has degree at least three. Therefore each vertex in G has deficiency at most three, so there are at least four vertices with positive deficiency. In particular we can choose a vertex v with at most five neighbors that is different from a, b and c. Let G' be formed by removing v from G and retriangulating the face f formed by removing v. By induction, G' has a combinatorially isomorphic straight line re-embedding in which abc is the outer face. Because the re-embedding of G' was combinatorially isomorphic to G', removing from it the edges which were added to create G' leaves the face f, which is now a polygon P with at most five sides. To complete the drawing to a straight-line combinatorially isomorphic re-embedding of G, v should be placed in the polygon and joined by straight lines to the vertices of the polygon. By the art gallery theorem, there exists a point interior to P at which v can be placed so that the edges from v to the vertices of P do not cross any other edges, completing the proof. The induction step of this proof is illustrated at right. Related