results: De Fraysseix, Pach and Pollack showed how to find in linear time a straight-line drawing in a grid with dimensions linear in the size of the graph, giving a universal point set with quadratic size. A similar method has been followed by Schnyder to prove enhanced bounds and a characterization of planarity based on the incidence partial order. His work stressed the existence of a particular partition of the edges of a maximal planar graph into three trees known as a Schnyder wood. Tutte's spring theorem states that every 3-connected planar graph can be drawn on a plane without crossings so that its edges are straight line segments and an outside face is a convex polygon (Tutte 1963). It is so called because such an embedding can be found as the equilibrium position for a system of springs representing the edges of the graph. Steinitz's theorem states that every 3-connected planar graph can be represented as the edges of a convex polyhedron in three-dimensional space. A straight-line embedding of G,, of the type described by Tutte's theorem, may be formed by projecting such a polyhedral representation onto the plane. The Circle packing theorem states that every planar graph may be represented as the intersection graph of a collection of non-crossing circles in the plane. Placing each vertex of the graph at the center of the corresponding circle leads to a straight line representation. Unsolved problem in mathematics: Does every planar graph have a straight line representation in which all edge lengths are integers? (more unsolved problems in mathematics) Heiko Harborth raised the question of whether every planar graph has a straight line representation in which all edge lengths are integers.[2] The truth of Harborth's conjecture remains unknown as of 2023[update]. However, integer-distance straight line embeddings are known to exist for cubic graphs.[3] Sachs (1983) raised the question of whether every graph with a linkless embedding in three-dimensional Euclidean space has a linkless embedding in which all edges are represented by straight line segments, analogously to Fáry's theorem for two-dimensional embeddings. See