Discussion: The first isomorphism theorem can be expressed in category theoretical language by saying that the category of groups is (normal epi, mono)-factorizable; in other words, the normal epimorphisms and the monomorphisms form a factorization system for the category. This is captured in the commutative diagram in the margin, which shows the objects and morphisms whose existence can be deduced from the morphism f:G→H:G. The diagram shows that every morphism in the category of groups has a kernel in the category theoretical sense; the arbitrary morphism f factors into ι∘πι∘π, where ι is a monomorphism and π is an epimorphism (in a conormal category, all epimorphisms are normal). This is represented in the diagram by an object ker⁡f and a monomorphism κ:ker⁡f→Gκ: (kernels are always monomorphisms), which complete the short exact sequence running from the lower left to the upper right of the diagram. The use of the exact sequence convention saves us from having to draw the zero morphisms from ker⁡f to H and G/ker⁡f/. If the sequence is right split (i.e., there is a morphism σ that maps G/ker⁡f/kerf to a π-preimage of itself), then G is the semidirect product of the normal subgroup im⁡κimκ and the subgroup im⁡σimσ. If it is left split (i.e., there exists some ρ:G→ker⁡fρ:G→kerf such that ρ∘κ=idkerfρ∘κ=id_kerf), then it must also be right split, and im⁡κ×im⁡σimκ×imσ is a direct product decomposition of G. In general, the existence of a right split does not imply the existence of a left split; but in an abelian category (such as that of abelian groups), left splits and right splits are equivalent by the splitting lemma, and a right split is sufficient to produce a direct sum decomposition im⁡κ⊕im⁡σimκ⊕imσ. In an abelian category, all monomorphisms are also normal, and the diagram may be extended by a second short exact sequence 0→G/ker⁡f→H→coker⁡f→00/kerf→cokerf→0. In the second isomorphism theorem, the product SN is the join of S and N in the lattice of subgroups of G, while the intersection S ∩ N is the meet. The third isomorphism theorem is generalized by the nine lemma to abelian categories and more general maps between objects.