matrix: Let A be a square n Ã— n matrix with n linearly independent eigenvectors qi (where i = 1, ..., n). Then A can be factorized as A=QÎ›Qâˆ’1ğ€=ğÎ›ğ^-1 where Q is the square n Ã— n matrix whose ith column is the eigenvector qi of A, and Î› is the diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements are the corresponding eigenvalues, Î›ii = Î»i. Note that only diagonalizable matrices can be factorized in this way. For example, the defective matrix [1101][[ 1 1; 0 1 ]] (which is a shear matrix) cannot be diagonalized. The n eigenvectors qi are usually normalized, but they need not be. A non-normalized set of n eigenvectors, vi can also be used as the columns of Q. That can be understood by noting that the magnitude of the eigenvectors in Q gets canceled in the decomposition by the presence of Qâˆ’1. If one of the eigenvalues Î»i has more than one linearly independent eigenvectors (that is, the geometric multiplicity of Î»i is greater than 1), then these eigenvectors for this eigenvalue Î»i can be chosen to be mutually orthogonal; however, if two eigenvectors belong to two different eigenvalues, it may be impossible for them to be orthogonal to each other (see Example below). One special case is that if A is a normal matrix, then by the spectral theorem, it's always possible to diagonalize A in an orthonormal basis {qi}. The decomposition can be derived from the fundamental property of eigenvectors: Av=Î»vAQ=QÎ›A=QÎ›Qâˆ’1.ğ€ğ¯ =Î»ğ¯ ğ€ğ =ğÎ› ğ€ =ğÎ›ğ^-1. The linearly independent eigenvectors qi with nonzero eigenvalues form a basis (not necessarily orthonormal) for all possible products Ax, for x âˆˆ Cn, which is the same as the image (or range) of the corresponding matrix transformation, and also the column space of the matrix A. The number of linearly independent eigenvectors qi with nonzero eigenvalues is equal to the rank of the matrix A, and also the dimension of the image (or range) of the corresponding matrix transformation, as well as its column space. The linearly independent eigenvectors qi with an eigenvalue of zero form a basis (which can be chosen to be orthonormal) for the null space (also known as the kernel) of the matrix transformation A.