curve: The Jordan-Schoenflies theorem for continuous curves can be proved using Carathéodory's theorem on conformal mapping. It states that the Riemann mapping between the interior of a simple Jordan curve and the open unit disk extends continuously to a homeomorphism between their closures, mapping the Jordan curve homeomorphically onto the unit circle.[6] To prove the theorem, Carathéodory's theorem can be applied to the two regions on the Riemann sphere defined by the Jordan curve. This will result in homeomorphisms between their closures and the closed disks |z| ≤ 1 and |z| ≥ 1. The homeomorphisms from the Jordan curve to the circle will differ by a homeomorphism of the circle which can be extended to the unit disk (or its complement) by the Alexander trick. Composition with this homeomorphism will yield a pair of homeomorphisms which match on the Jordan curve and therefore define a homeomorphism of the Riemann sphere carrying the Jordan curve onto the unit circle. The continuous case can also be deduced from the polygonal case by approximating the continuous curve by a polygon.[7] The Jordan curve theorem is first deduced by this method. The Jordan curve is given by a continuous function on the unit circle. It and the inverse function from its image back to the unit circle are uniformly continuous. So dividing the circle up into small enough intervals, there are points on the curve such that the line segments joining adjacent points lie close to the curve, say by ε. Together these line segments form a polygonal curve. If it has self-intersections, these must also create polygonal loops. Erasing these loops, results in a polygonal curve without self-intersections which still lies close to the curve; some of its vertices might not lie on the curve, but they all lie within a neighbourhood of the curve. The polygonal curve divides the plane into two regions, one bounded region U and one unbounded region V. Both U and V ∪ ∞ are continuous images of the closed unit disk. Since the original curve is contained within a small neighbourhood of the polygonal curve, the union of the images of slightly smaller concentric open disks entirely misses the original curve and their union excludes a small neighbourhood of the curve. One of the images is a bounded open set consisting of points around which the curve has winding number one; the other is an unbounded open set consisting of points of winding number zero. Repeating for a sequence of values of ε tending to 0, leads to a union of open path-connected bounded sets of points of winding number one and a union of open path-connected unbounded sets of winding number zero. By construction these two disjoint open path-connected sets fill out the complement of the curve in the plane.[8] Hexagonal tessellation of the plane: if 2 hexagons meet they must have a common edge A standard brickwork tiling of the plane Given the Jordan curve theorem, the Jordan-Schoenflies theorem can be proved as follows.[9] The first step is to show that a dense set of points on the curve are accessible from the inside of the curve, i.e. they are at the end of a line segment lying entirely in the interior of the curve. In fact, a given point on the curve is arbitrarily close to some point in the interior and there is a smallest closed disk about that point which intersects the curve only on its boundary; those boundary points are close to the original point on the curve and by construction are accessible. The second step is to prove that given finitely many accessible points Ai on the curve connected to line segments AiBi in its interior, there are disjoint polygonal curves in the interior with vertices on each of the line segments such that their distance to the original curve is arbitrarily small. This requires tessellations of the plane by uniformly small tiles such that if two tiles meet they have a side or a segment of a side in common: examples are the standard hexagonal tessellation; or the standard brickwork tiling by rectangles or squares with common or stretch bonds. It suffices to construct a polygonal path so that its distance to the Jordan curve is arbitrarily small. Orient the tessellation such no side of a tiles is parallel to any AiBi. The size of the tiles can be taken arbitrarily small. Take the union of all the closed tiles containing at least one point of the Jordan curve. Its boundary is made up of disjoint polygonal curves. If the size of the tiles is sufficiently small, the endpoints Bi will lie in the interior of exactly one of the polygonal boundary curves. Its distance to the Jordan curve is less than twice the diameter of the tiles, so is arbitrarily small. The third step is to prove that any homeomorphism f between the curve and a given triangle can be extended to a homeomorphism between the closures of their interiors. In fact take a sequence ε1, ε2, ε3, ... decreasing to zero. Choose finitely many points Ai on the Jordan curve Γ with successive points less than ε1 apart. Make the construction of the second step with tiles of diameter less than ε1 and take Ci to be the points on the polygonal curve Γ1 intersecting AiBi. Take the points f(Ai) on the triangle. Fix an origin in the triangle Δ and scale the triangle to get a smaller one Δ1 at a distance less than ε1 from the original triangle. Let Di be the points at the intersection of the radius through f(Ai) and the smaller triangle. There is a piecewise linear homeomorphism F1 of the polygonal curve onto the smaller triangle carrying Ci onto Di. By the Jordan-Schoenflies theorem it extends to a homeomorphism F1 between the closure of their interiors. Now carry out the same process for ε2 with a new set of points on the Jordan curve. This will produce a second polygonal path Γ2 between Γ1 and Γ. There is likewise a second triangle Δ2 between Δ1 and Δ. The line segments for the accessible points on Γ divide the polygonal region between Γ2 and Γ1 into a union of polygonal regions; similarly for radii for the corresponding points on Δ divides the region between Δ2 and Δ1 into a union of polygonal regions. The homeomorphism F1 can be extended to homeomorphisms between the different polygons, agreeing on common edges (closed intervals on line segments or radii). By the polygonal Jordan-Schoenflies theorem, each of these homeomorphisms extends to the interior of the polygon. Together they yield a homeomorphism F2 of the closure of the interior of Γ2 onto the closure of the interior of Δ2; F2 extends F1. Continuing in this way produces polygonal curves Γn and triangles Δn with a homomeomorphism Fn between the closures of their interiors; Fn extends Fn – 1. The regions inside the Γn increase to the region inside Γ; and the triangles Δn increase to Δ. The homeomorphisms Fn patch together to give a homeomorphism F from the interior of Γ onto the interior of Δ. By construction it has limit f on the boundary curves Γ and Δ. Hence F is the required homeomorphism. The fourth step is to prove that any homeomorphism between Jordan curves can be extended to a homeomorphism between the closures of their interiors. By the result of the third step, it is sufficient to show that any homeomorphism of the boundary of a triangle extends to a homeomorphism of the closure of its interior. This is a consequence of the Alexander trick. (The Alexander trick also establishes a homeomorphism between the solid triangle and the closed disk: the homeomorphism is just the natural radial extension of the projection of the triangle onto its circumcircle with respect to its circumcentre.) The final step is to prove that given two Jordan curves there is a homeomorphism of the plane of compact support carrying one curve onto the other. In fact each Jordan curve lies inside the same large circle and in the interior of each large circle there are radii joining two diagonally opposite points to the curve. Each configuration divide the plane into the exterior of the large circle, the interior of the Jordan curve and the region between the two into two bounded regions bounded by Jordan curves (formed of two radii, a semicircle, and one of the halves of the Jordan curve). Take the identity homeomorphism of the large circle; piecewise linear homeomorphisms between the two pairs of radii; and a homeomorphism between the two pairs of halves of the Jordan curves given by a linear reparametrization. The 4 homeomorphisms patch together on the boundary arcs to yield a homeomorphism of the plane given by the identity off the large circle and carrying one Jordan curve onto the other. Smooth