proof: Let f be a holomorphic function on a set G \ K, where G is an open subset of Cn (n ≥ 2) and K is a compact subset of G. If the complement G \ K is connected, then f can be extended to a unique holomorphic function F on G.[8] Ehrenpreis' proof is based on the existence of smooth bump functions, unique continuation of holomorphic functions, and the Poincaré lemma — the last in the form that for any smooth and compactly supported differential (0,1)-form ω on Cn with ∂ω = 0, there exists a smooth and compactly supported function η on Cn with ∂η = ω. The crucial assumption n ≥ 2 is required for the validity of this Poincaré lemma; if n = 1 then it is generally impossible for η to be compactly supported.[9] The ansatz for F is φ f − v for smooth functions φ and v on G; such an expression is meaningful provided that φ is identically equal to zero where f is undefined (namely on K). Furthermore, given any holomorphic function on G which is equal to f on some open set, unique continuation (based on connectedness of G \ K) shows that it is equal to f on all of G \ K. The holomorphicity of this function is identical to the condition ∂v = f ∂φ. For any smooth function φ, the differential (0,1)-form f ∂φ is ∂-closed. Choosing φ to be a smooth function which is identically equal to zero on K and identically equal to one on the complement of some compact subset L of G, this (0,1)-form additionally has compact support, so that the Poincaré lemma identifies an appropriate v of compact support. This defines F as a holomorphic function on G; it only remains to show (following the above comments) that it coincides with f on some open set. On the set Cn \ L, v is holomorphic since φ is identically constant. Since it is zero near infinity, unique continuation applies to show that it is identically zero on some open subset of G \ L.[10] Thus, on this open subset, F equals f and the existence part of Hartog's theorem is proved. Uniqueness is automatic from unique continuation, based on connectedness of G. Counterexamples in dimension