Description: Consider binary strings of length 6. The schema 1*10*1 describes the set of all strings of length 6 with 1's at positions 1, 3 and 6 and a 0 at position 4. The * is a wildcard symbol, which means that positions 2 and 5 can have a value of either 1 or 0. The order of a schema o(H)(H) is defined as the number of fixed positions in the template, while the defining length δ(H)δ(H) is the distance between the first and last specific positions. The order of 1*10*1 is 4 and its defining length is 5. The fitness of a schema is the average fitness of all strings matching the schema. The fitness of a string is a measure of the value of the encoded problem solution, as computed by a problem-specific evaluation function. Using the established methods and genetic operators of genetic algorithms, the schema theorem states that short, low-order schemata with above-average fitness increase exponentially in successive generations. Expressed as an equation: E⁡(m(H,t+1))≥m(H,t)f(H)at[1−p].E(m(H,t+1))≥m(H,t)f(H)_t[1-p]. Here m(H,t)(H,t) is the number of strings belonging to schema H at generation t, f(H)(H) is the observed average fitness of schema H and at_t is the observed average fitness at generation t. The probability of disruption p is the probability that crossover or mutation will destroy the schema H. Under the assumption that pm≪1_m≪1, it can be expressed as: p=δ(H)l−1pc+o(H)pm=δ(H)-1p_c+o(H)p_m where o(H)(H) is the order of the schema, l is the length of the code, pm_m is the probability of mutation and pc_c is the probability of crossover. So a schema with a shorter defining length δ(H)δ(H) is less likely to be disrupted.An often misunderstood point is why the Schema Theorem is an inequality rather than an equality. The answer is in fact simple: the Theorem neglects the small, yet non-zero, probability that a string belonging to the schema H will be created "from scratch" by mutation of a single string (or recombination of two strings) that did not belong to H in the previous generation. Moreover, the expression for p is clearly pessimistic: depending on the mating partner, recombination may not disrupt the scheme even when a cross point is selected between the first and the last fixed position of H.