Proof: A π rotation in the Euclidean xt plane can be used to rotate vacuum expectation values of the field product of the previous section. The time rotation turns the argument of the previous section into the spin–statistics theorem. The proof requires the following assumptions: The theory has a Lorentz-invariant Lagrangian. The vacuum is Lorentz-invariant. The particle is a localized excitation. Microscopically, it is not attached to a string or domain wall. The particle is propagating, meaning that it has a finite, not infinite, mass. The particle is a real excitation, meaning that states containing this particle have a positive-definite norm. These assumptions are for the most part necessary, as the following examples show: The spinless anticommuting field shows that spinless fermions are non relativistically consistent. Likewise, the theory of a spinor commuting field shows that spinning bosons are too. This assumption may be weakened. In 2+1 dimensions, sources for the Chern–Simons theory can have exotic spins, despite the fact that the three-dimensional rotation group has only integer and half-integer spin representations. An ultra local field can have either statistics independently of its spin. This is related to Lorentz invariance, since an infinitely massive particle is always nonrelativistic, and the spin decouples from the dynamics. Although colored quarks are attached to a QCD string and have infinite mass, the spin–statistics relation for quarks can be proved in the short distance limit. Gauge ghosts are spinless fermions, but they include states of negative norm. Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that the theory is described by a path integral, and assumption 3 implies that there is a local field which creates the particle. The rotation plane includes time, and a rotation in a plane involving time in the Euclidean theory defines a CPT transformation in the Minkowski theory. If the theory is described by a path integral, a CPT transformation takes states to their conjugates, so that the correlation function ⟨0|Rϕ(x)ϕ(−x)|0⟩⟨0|Rϕ(x)ϕ(-x)|0⟩ must be positive definite at x=0 by assumption 5, the particle states have positive norm. The assumption of finite mass implies that this correlation function is nonzero for x spacelike. Lorentz invariance now allows the fields to be rotated inside the correlation function in the manner of the argument of the previous section: ⟨0|RRϕ(x)Rϕ(−x)|0⟩=±⟨0|ϕ(−x)Rϕ(x)|0⟩⟨0|RRϕ(x)Rϕ(-x)|0⟩=±⟨0|ϕ(-x)Rϕ(x)|0⟩ Where the sign depends on the spin, as before. The CPT invariance, or Euclidean rotational invariance, of the correlation function guarantees that this is equal to G(x). So ⟨0|(Rϕ(x)ϕ(y)−ϕ(y)Rϕ(x))|0⟩=0⟨0|(Rϕ(x)ϕ(y)-ϕ(y)Rϕ(x))|0⟩=0 for integer-spin fields and ⟨0|Rϕ(x)ϕ(y)+ϕ(y)Rϕ(x)|0⟩=0⟨0|Rϕ(x)ϕ(y)+ϕ(y)Rϕ(x)|0⟩=0 for half-integer–spin fields. Since the operators are spacelike separated, a different order can only create states that differ by a phase. The argument fixes the phase to be −1 or 1 according to the spin. Since it is possible to rotate the space-like separated polarizations independently by local perturbations, the phase should not depend on the polarization in appropriately chosen field coordinates. This argument is due to Julian Schwinger.[9] An elementary explanation for the spin-statistics theorem cannot be given despite the fact that the theorem is so simple to state. In the Feynman Lectures on Physics, Richard Feynman said that this probably means that we do not have a complete understanding of the fundamental principle involved. see Further reading below. To test the theorem, Drake[10] carried out very precise calculations for states of the He atom that violate the Pauli exclusion principle; they are called paronic states. Later,[11] the paronic state 1s2s 1S0 of He calculated by Drake was looked for using an atomic beam spectrometer. The search was unsuccessful with an upper limit of 5×10−6.