argument: Consider the two-field operator product R(π)ϕ(x)ϕ(−x),(π)ϕ(x)ϕ(-x), where R is the matrix that rotates the spin polarization of the field by 180 degrees when one does a 180-degree rotation around some particular axis. The components of ϕϕ are not shown in this notation. ϕϕ has many components, and the matrix R mixes them up with one another. In a non-relativistic theory, this product can be interpreted as annihilating two particles at positions x and −x-x with polarizations that are rotated by ππ relative to each other. Now rotate this configuration by ππ around the origin. Under this rotation, the two points x and −x-x switch places, and the two field polarizations are additionally rotated by a ππ. So we get R(2π)ϕ(−x)R(π)ϕ(x),(2π)ϕ(-x)R(π)ϕ(x), which for integer spin is equal to ϕ(−x)R(π)ϕ(x)ϕ(-x)R(π)ϕ(x) and for half-integer spin is equal to −ϕ(−x)R(π)ϕ(x)-ϕ(-x)R(π)ϕ(x) (proved at Spin (physics) § Rotations). Both the operators ±ϕ(−x)R(π)ϕ(x)±ϕ(-x)R(π)ϕ(x) still annihilate two particles at x and −x-x. Hence we claim to have shown that, with respect to particle states: R(π)ϕ(x)ϕ(−x)=ϕ(−x)R(π)ϕ(x)forintegralspins,−ϕ(−x)R(π)ϕ(x)forhalf-integralspins.(π)ϕ(x)ϕ(-x)=ϕ(-x)R(π)ϕ(x) forintegralspins, -ϕ(-x)R(π)ϕ(x) forhalf-integralspins. So exchanging the order of two appropriately polarized operator insertions into the vacuum can be done by a rotation, at the cost of a sign in the half-integer case. This argument by itself does not prove anything like the spin–statistics relation. To see why, consider a nonrelativistic spin-0 field described by a free Schrödinger equation. Such a field can be anticommuting or commuting. To see where it fails, consider that a nonrelativistic spin-0 field has no polarization, so that the product above is simply: ϕ(−x)ϕ(x).ϕ(-x)ϕ(x). In the nonrelativistic theory, this product annihilates two particles at x and −x-x, and has zero expectation value in any state. In order to have a nonzero matrix element, this operator product must be between states with two more particles on the right than on the left: ⟨0|ϕ(−x)ϕ(x)|ψ⟩.⟨0|ϕ(-x)ϕ(x)|ψ⟩. Performing the rotation, all that we learn is that rotating the 2-particle state |ψ⟩|ψ⟩ gives the same sign as changing the operator order. This gives no additional information, so this argument does not prove anything. Why the bogus argument