theorem): Given an m-dimensional Riemannian manifold (M, g), an isometric embedding is a continuously differentiable topological embedding f: M → ℝn such that the pullback of the Euclidean metric equals g. In analytical terms, this may be viewed (relative to a smooth coordinate chart x) as a system of 1/2m(m + 1) many first-order partial differential equations for n unknown (real-valued) functions: gij(x)=∑α=1n∂fα∂xi∂fα∂xj._ij(x)=∑_α=1^n^α/^i^α/^j. If n is less than 1/2m(m + 1), then there are more equations than unknowns. From this perspective, the existence of isometric embeddings given by the following theorem is considered surprising. Nash–Kuiper theorem.[2] Let (M, g) be an m-dimensional Riemannian manifold and f: M → ℝn a short smooth embedding (or immersion) into Euclidean space ℝn, where n ≥ m + 1. This map is not required to be isometric. Then there is a sequence of continuously differentiable isometric embeddings (or immersions) M → ℝn of g which converge uniformly to f. The theorem was originally proved by John Nash with the stronger assumption n ≥ m + 2. His method was modified by Nicolaas Kuiper to obtain the theorem above.[3][4] The isometric embeddings produced by the Nash–Kuiper theorem are often considered counterintuitive and pathological.[5] They often fail to be smoothly differentiable. For example, a well-known theorem of David Hilbert asserts that the hyperbolic plane cannot be smoothly isometrically immersed into ℝ3. Any Einstein manifold of negative scalar curvature cannot be smoothly isometrically immersed as a hypersurface,[6] and a theorem of Shiing-Shen Chern and Kuiper even says that any closed m-dimensional manifold of nonpositive sectional curvature cannot be smoothly isometrically immersed in ℝ2m – 1.[7] Furthermore, some smooth isometric embeddings exhibit rigidity phenomena which are violated by the largely unrestricted choice of f in the Nash–Kuiper theorem. For example, the image of any smooth isometric hypersurface immersion of the round sphere must itself be a round sphere.[8] By contrast, the Nash–Kuiper theorem ensures the existence of continuously differentiable isometric hypersurface immersions of the round sphere which are arbitrarily close to (for instance) a topological embedding of the sphere as a small ellipsoid. Any closed and oriented two-dimensional manifold can be smoothly embedded in ℝ3. Any such embedding can be scaled by an arbitrarily small constant so as to become short, relative to any given Riemannian metric on the surface. It follows from the Nash–Kuiper theorem that there are continuously differentiable isometric embeddings of any such Riemannian surface where the radius of a circumscribed ball is arbitrarily small. By contrast, no negatively curved closed surface can even be smoothly isometrically embedded in ℝ3.[9] Moreover, for any smooth (or even C2) isometric embedding of an arbitrary closed Riemannian surface, there is a quantitative (positive) lower bound on the radius of a circumscribed ball in terms of the surface area and curvature of the embedded metric.[10] In higher dimension, as follows from the Whitney embedding theorem, the Nash–Kuiper theorem shows that any closed m-dimensional Riemannian manifold admits an continuously differentiable isometric embedding into an arbitrarily small neighborhood in 2m-dimensional Euclidean space. Although Whitney's theorem also applies to noncompact manifolds, such embeddings cannot simply be scaled by a small constant so as to become short. Nash proved that every m-dimensional Riemannian manifold admits a continuously differentiable isometric embedding into ℝ2m + 1.[11] At the time of Nash's work, his theorem was considered to be something of a mathematical curiosity. The result itself has not found major applications. However, Nash's method of proof was adapted by Camillo De Lellis and László Székelyhidi to construct low-regularity solutions, with prescribed kinetic energy, of the Euler equations from the mathematical study of fluid mechanics. In analytical terms, the Euler equations have a formal similarity to the isometric embedding equations, via the quadratic nonlinearity in the first derivatives of the unknown function.[12] The ideas of Nash's proof were abstracted by Mikhael Gromov to the principle of convex integration, with a corresponding h-principle.[13] This was applied by Stefan Müller and Vladimír Šverák to Hilbert's nineteenth problem, constructing minimizers of minimal differentiability in the calculus of variations.[14] Ck embedding