contradiction: First of all, one associates a simple planar graph G to the given map, namely one puts a vertex in each region of the map, then connects two vertices with an edge if and only if the corresponding regions share a common border. The problem is then translated into a graph coloring problem: one has to paint the vertices of the graph so that no edge has endpoints of the same color. Because G is a simple planar, i.e. it may be embedded in the plane without intersecting edges, and it does not have two vertices sharing more than one edge, and it does not have loops, then it can be shown (using the Euler characteristic of the plane) that it must have a vertex shared by at most five edges. (Note: This is the only place where the five-color condition is used in the proof. If this technique is used to prove the four-color theorem, it will fail on this step. In fact, an icosahedral graph is 5-regular and planar, and thus does not have a vertex shared by at most four edges.) Find such a vertex, and call it v. Now remove v from G. The graph G′' obtained this way has one fewer vertex than G, so we can assume by induction that it can be colored with only five colors. If the coloring did not use all five colors on the five neighboring vertices of v, it can be colored in G with a color not used by the neighbors. So now look at those five vertices v1_1, v2_2, v3_3, v4_4, v5_5 that were adjacent to v in cyclic order (which depends on how we write G). So we can assume that v1_1, v2_2, v3_3, v4_4, v5_5 are colored with colors 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 respectively. Now consider the subgraph G1,3_1,3 of G′' consisting of the vertices that are colored with colors 1 and 3 only and the edges connecting them. To be clear, each edge connects a color 1 vertex to a color 3 vertex (this is called a Kempe chain). If v1_1 and v3_3 lie in different connected components of G1,3_1,3, we can swap the 1 and 3 colors on the component containing v1_1 without affecting the coloring of the rest of G′'. This frees color 1 for v completing the task. If on the contrary v1_1 and v3_3 lie in the same connected component of G1,3_1,3, we can find a path in G1,3_1,3 joining them that consists of only color 1 and 3 vertices. Now turn to the subgraph G2,4_2,4 of G′' consisting of the vertices that are colored with colors 2 and 4 only and the edges connecting them, and apply the same arguments as before. Then either we are able to reverse the 2-4 coloration on the subgraph of G2,4_2,4 containing v2_2 and paint v color 2, or we can connect v2_2 and v4_4 with a path that consists of only color 2 and 4 vertices. Such a path would intersect the 1-3 colored path we constructed before since v1_1 through v5_5 were in cyclic order. This is clearly absurd as it contradicts the planarity of the graph. So G can in fact be five-colored, contrary to the initial presumption. Linear time five-coloring