Examples: The trivial action of any group G on any set X is defined by g⋅x = x for all g in G and all x in X; that is, every group element induces the identity permutation on X.[12] In every group G, left multiplication is an action of G on G: g⋅x = gx for all g, x in G. This action is free and transitive (regular), and forms the basis of a rapid proof of Cayley's theorem - that every group is isomorphic to a subgroup of the symmetric group of permutations of the set G. In every group G with subgroup H, left multiplication is an action of G on the set of cosets G/H: g⋅aH = gaH for all g,a in G. In particular if H contains no nontrivial normal subgroups of G this induces an isomorphism from G to a subgroup of the permutation group of degree [G : H]. In every group G, conjugation is an action of G on G: g⋅x = gxg−1. An exponential notation is commonly used for the right-action variant: xg = g−1xg; it satisfies (xg)h = xgh. In every group G with subgroup H, conjugation is an action of G on conjugates of H: g⋅K = gKg−1 for all g in G and K conjugates of H. An action of Zℤ on a set X uniquely determines and is determined by an automorphism of X, given by the action of 1. Similarly, an action of Z/2Zℤ/2ℤ on X is equivalent to the data of an involution of X. The symmetric group Sn and its subgroups act on the set { 1, …, n } by permuting its elements The symmetry group of a polyhedron acts on the set of vertices of that polyhedron. It also acts on the set of faces or the set of edges of the polyhedron. The symmetry group of any geometrical object acts on the set of points of that object. The automorphism group of a vector space (or graph, or group, or ring . . .) acts on the vector space (or set of vertices of the graph, or group, or ring . . .). The general linear group GL(n, K) and its subgroups, particularly its Lie subgroups (including the special linear group SL(n, K), orthogonal group O(n, K), special orthogonal group SO(n, K), and symplectic group Sp(n, K)) are Lie groups that act on the vector space Kn. The group operations are given by multiplying the matrices from the groups with the vectors from Kn. The general linear group GL(n, Z) acts on Zn by natural matrix action. The orbits of its action are classified by the greatest common divisor of coordinates of the vector in Zn. The affine group acts transitively on the points of an affine space, and the subgroup V of the affine group (that is, a vector space) has transitive and free (that is, regular) action on these points;[13] indeed this can be used to give a definition of an affine space. The projective linear group PGL(n + 1, K) and its subgroups, particularly its Lie subgroups, which are Lie groups that act on the projective space Pn(K). This is a quotient of the action of the general linear group on projective space. Particularly notable is PGL(2, K), the symmetries of the projective line, which is sharply 3-transitive, preserving the cross ratio; the Möbius group PGL(2, C) is of particular interest. The isometries of the plane act on the set of 2D images and patterns, such as wallpaper patterns. The definition can be made more precise by specifying what is meant by image or pattern, for example, a function of position with values in a set of colors. Isometries are in fact one example of affine group (action).[dubious – discuss] The sets acted on by a group G comprise the category of G-sets in which the objects are G-sets and the morphisms are G-set homomorphisms: functions f : X → Y such that g⋅(f(x)) = f(g⋅x) for every g in G. The Galois group of a field extension L/K acts on the field L but has only a trivial action on elements of the subfield K. Subgroups of Gal(L/K) correspond to subfields of L that contain K, that is, intermediate field extensions between L and K. The additive group of the real numbers (R, +) acts on the phase space of "well-behaved" systems in classical mechanics (and in more general dynamical systems) by time translation: if t is in R and x is in the phase space, then x describes a state of the system, and t + x is defined to be the state of the system t seconds later if t is positive or −t seconds ago if t is negative. The additive group of the real numbers (R, +) acts on the set of real functions of a real variable in various ways, with (t⋅f)(x) equal to, for example, f(x + t), f(x) + t, f(xet), f(x)et, f(x + t)et, or f(xet) + t, but not f(xet + t). Given a group action of G on X, we can define an induced action of G on the power set of X, by setting g⋅U = {g⋅u : u ∈ U} for every subset U of X and every g in G. This is useful, for instance, in studying the action of the large Mathieu group on a 24-set and in studying symmetry in certain models of finite geometries. The quaternions with norm 1 (the versors), as a multiplicative group, act on R3: for any such quaternion z = cos α/2 + v sin α/2, the mapping f(x) = zxz∗ is a counterclockwise rotation through an angle α about an axis given by a unit vector v; z is the same rotation; see quaternions and spatial rotation. Note that this is not a faithful action because the quaternion −1 leaves all points where they were, as does the quaternion 1. Given left G-sets X,Y,Y, there is a left G-set YX^X whose elements are G-equivariant maps α:X×G→Yα:X, and with left G-action given by g⋅α=α∘(idX×−g)·α=α∘(id_X×-g) (where "−g-g" indicates right multiplication by g). This G-set has the property that its fixed points correspond to equivariant maps X→Y; more generally, it is an exponential object in the category of G-sets. Group actions and