theorems: Euclid's formulation of the parallel postulate may be stated in terms of a transversal. Specifically, if the interior angles on the same side of the transversal are less than two right angles then lines must intersect. In fact, Euclid uses the same phrase in Greek that is usually translated as "transversal".[5]: 308, nfote 1 Euclid's Proposition 27 states that if a transversal intersects two lines so that alternate interior angles are congruent, then the lines are parallel. Euclid proves this by contradiction: If the lines are not parallel then they must intersect and a triangle is formed. Then one of the alternate angles is an exterior angle equal to the other angle which is an opposite interior angle in the triangle. This contradicts Proposition 16 which states that an exterior angle of a triangle is always greater than the opposite interior angles.[5]: 307 [3]: Art. 88 Euclid's Proposition 28 extends this result in two ways. First, if a transversal intersects two lines so that corresponding angles are congruent, then the lines are parallel. Second, if a transversal intersects two lines so that interior angles on the same side of the transversal are supplementary, then the lines are parallel. These follow from the previous proposition by applying the fact that opposite angles of intersecting lines are equal (Prop. 15) and that adjacent angles on a line are supplementary (Prop. 13). As noted by Proclus, Euclid gives only three of a possible six such criteria for parallel lines.[5]: 309–310 [3]: Art. 89-90 Euclid's Proposition 29 is a converse to the previous two. First, if a transversal intersects two parallel lines, then the alternate interior angles are congruent. If not, then one is greater than the other, which implies its supplement is less than the supplement of the other angle. This implies that there are interior angles on the same side of the transversal which are less than two right angles, contradicting the fifth postulate. The proposition continues by stating that on a transversal of two parallel lines, corresponding angles are congruent and the interior angles on the same side are equal to two right angles. These statements follow in the same way that Prop. 28 follows from Prop. 27.[5]: 311–312 [3]: Art. 93-95 Euclid's proof makes essential use of the fifth postulate, however, modern treatments of geometry use Playfair's axiom instead. To prove proposition 29 assuming Playfair's axiom, let a transversal cross two parallel lines and suppose that the alternate interior angles are not equal. Draw a third line through the point where the transversal crosses the first line, but with an angle equal to the angle the transversal makes with the second line. This produces two different lines through a point, both parallel to another line, contradicting the axiom.[5]: 313 [6] In higher