On collapse of the polynomial hierarchy if NP is in non-uniform polynomial time class This article may be too technical for most readers to understand. Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts, without removing the technical details. (October 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The notation used in this article is explained on the page polynomial hierarchy. In complexity theory, the Karp–Lipton theorem states that if the Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT) can be solved by Boolean circuits with a polynomial number of logic gates, then Π2=Σ2Π_2=Σ_2 and therefore PH=Σ2.𝖯𝖧=Σ_2. That is, if we assume that NP, the class of nondeterministic polynomial time problems, can be contained in the non-uniform polynomial time complexity class P/poly, then this assumption implies the collapse of the polynomial hierarchy at its second level. Such a collapse is believed unlikely, so the theorem is generally viewed by complexity theorists as evidence for the nonexistence of polynomial size circuits for SAT or for other NP-complete problems. A proof that such circuits do not exist would imply that P ≠ NP. As P/poly contains all problems solvable in randomized polynomial time (Adleman's theorem), the theorem is also evidence that the use of randomization does not lead to polynomial time algorithms for NP-complete problems. The Karp–Lipton theorem is named after Richard M. Karp and Richard J. Lipton, who first proved it in 1980. (Their original proof collapsed PH to Σ3Σ_3, but Michael Sipser improved it to Σ2Σ_2.) Variants of the theorem state that, under the same assumption, MA = AM, and PH collapses to SP2 complexity class. There are stronger conclusions possible if PSPACE, or some other complexity classes are assumed to have polynomial-sized circuits; see P/poly. If NP is assumed to be a subset of BPP (which is a subset of P/poly), then the polynomial hierarchy collapses to BPP.[1] If coNP is assumed to be subset of NP/poly, then the polynomial hierarchy collapses to its third level.