statements: There are several equivalent formulations of the theorem: Every univariate polynomial of positive degree with real coefficients has at least one complex root. Every univariate polynomial of positive degree with complex coefficients has at least one complex root. This implies immediately the previous assertion, as real numbers are also complex numbers. The converse results from the fact that one gets a polynomial with real coefficients by taking the product of a polynomial and its complex conjugate (obtained by replacing each coefficient with its complex conjugate). A root of this product is either a root of the given polynomial, or of its conjugate; in the latter case, the conjugate of this root is a root of the given polynomial. Every univariate polynomial of positive degree n with complex coefficients can be factorized as c(x−r1)⋯(x−rn),(x-r_1)⋯(x-r_n), where c,r1,…,rn,r_1,…,r_n are complex numbers. The n complex numbers r1,…,rn_1,…,r_n are the roots of the polynomial. If a root appears in several factors, it is a multiple root, and the number of its occurrences is, by definition, the multiplicity of the root. The proof that this statement results from the previous ones is done by recursion on n: when a root r1_1 has been found, the polynomial division by x−r1-r_1 provides a polynomial of degree n−1-1 whose roots are the other roots of the given polynomial. The next two statements are equivalent to the previous ones, although they do not involve any nonreal complex number. These statements can be proved from previous factorizations by remarking that, if r is a non-real root of a polynomial with real coefficients, its complex conjugate r¯r is also a root, and (x−r)(x−r¯)(x-r)(x-r) is a polynomial of degree two with real coefficients (this is the complex conjugate root theorem). Conversely, if one has a factor of degree two, the quadratic formula gives a root. Every univariate polynomial with real coefficients of degree larger than two has a factor of degree two with real coefficients. Every univariate polynomial with real coefficients of positive degree can be factored as cp1⋯pk,_1_k, where c is a real number and each pi_i is a monic polynomial of degree at most two with real coefficients. Moreover, one can suppose that the factors of degree two do not have any real root.