finance: Examples of bivariate copulæ used in finance. Typical finance applications: Analyzing systemic risk in financial markets[20] Analyzing and pricing spread options, in particular in fixed income constant maturity swap spread options Analyzing and pricing volatility smile/skew of exotic baskets, e.g. best/worst of Analyzing and pricing volatility smile/skew of less liquid FX[clarification needed] cross, which is effectively a basket: C = S1/S2 or C = S1·S2 Value-at-Risk forecasting and portfolio optimization to minimize tail risk for US and international equities[2] Forecasting equities returns for higher-moment portfolio optimization/full-scale optimization[20] Improving the estimates of a portfolio's expected return and variance-covariance matrix for input into sophisticated mean-variance optimization strategies[3] Statistical arbitrage strategies including pairs trading[21] In quantitative finance copulas are applied to risk management, to portfolio management and optimization, and to derivatives pricing. For the former, copulas are used to perform stress-tests and robustness checks that are especially important during "downside/crisis/panic regimes" where extreme downside events may occur (e.g., the global financial crisis of 2007–2008). The formula was also adapted for financial markets and was used to estimate the probability distribution of losses on pools of loans or bonds. During a downside regime, a large number of investors who have held positions in riskier assets such as equities or real estate may seek refuge in 'safer' investments such as cash or bonds. This is also known as a flight-to-quality effect and investors tend to exit their positions in riskier assets in large numbers in a short period of time. As a result, during downside regimes, correlations across equities are greater on the downside as opposed to the upside and this may have disastrous effects on the economy.[22][23] For example, anecdotally, we often read financial news headlines reporting the loss of hundreds of millions of dollars on the stock exchange in a single day; however, we rarely read reports of positive stock market gains of the same magnitude and in the same short time frame. Copulas aid in analyzing the effects of downside regimes by allowing the modelling of the marginals and dependence structure of a multivariate probability model separately. For example, consider the stock exchange as a market consisting of a large number of traders each operating with his/her own strategies to maximize profits. The individualistic behaviour of each trader can be described by modelling the marginals. However, as all traders operate on the same exchange, each trader's actions have an interaction effect with other traders'. This interaction effect can be described by modelling the dependence structure. Therefore, copulas allow us to analyse the interaction effects which are of particular interest during downside regimes as investors tend to herd their trading behaviour and decisions. (See also agent-based computational economics, where price is treated as an emergent phenomenon, resulting from the interaction of the various market participants, or agents.) The users of the formula have been criticized for creating "evaluation cultures" that continued to use simple copulæ despite the simple versions being acknowledged as inadequate for that purpose.[24][25] Thus, previously, scalable copula models for large dimensions only allowed the modelling of elliptical dependence structures (i.e., Gaussian and Student-t copulas) that do not allow for correlation asymmetries where correlations differ on the upside or downside regimes. However, the development of vine copulas[26] (also known as pair copulas) enables the flexible modelling of the dependence structure for portfolios of large dimensions.[27] The Clayton canonical vine copula allows for the occurrence of extreme downside events and has been successfully applied in portfolio optimization and risk management applications. The model is able to reduce the effects of extreme downside correlations and produces improved statistical and economic performance compared to scalable elliptical dependence copulas such as the Gaussian and Student-t copula.[28] Other models developed for risk management applications are panic copulas that are glued with market estimates of the marginal distributions to analyze the effects of panic regimes on the portfolio profit and loss distribution. Panic copulas are created by Monte Carlo simulation, mixed with a re-weighting of the probability of each scenario.[29] As regards derivatives pricing, dependence modelling with copula functions is widely used in applications of financial risk assessment and actuarial analysis – for example in the pricing of collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).[30] Some believe the methodology of applying the Gaussian copula to credit derivatives to be one of the reasons behind the global financial crisis of 2008–2009;[31][32][33] see David X. Li § CDOs and Gaussian copula. Despite this perception, there are documented attempts within the financial industry, occurring before the crisis, to address the limitations of the Gaussian copula and of copula functions more generally, specifically the lack of dependence dynamics. The Gaussian copula is lacking as it only allows for an elliptical dependence structure, as dependence is only modeled using the variance-covariance matrix.[28] This methodology is limited such that it does not allow for dependence to evolve as the financial markets exhibit asymmetric dependence, whereby correlations across assets significantly increase during downturns compared to upturns. Therefore, modeling approaches using the Gaussian copula exhibit a poor representation of extreme events.[28][34] There have been attempts to propose models rectifying some of the copula limitations.[34][35][36] Additional to CDOs, Copulas have been applied to other asset classes as a flexible tool in analyzing multi-asset derivative products. The first such application outside credit was to use a copula to construct a basket implied volatility surface,[37] taking into account the volatility smile of basket components. Copulas have since gained popularity in pricing and risk management[38] of options on multi-assets in the presence of a volatility smile, in equity-, foreign exchange- and fixed income derivatives. Civil