Statement: We will first state a simplified version of Tarski's theorem, then state and prove in the next section the theorem Tarski proved in 1933. Let L be the language of first-order arithmetic. This is the theory of the natural numbers, including their addition and multiplication, axiomatized by the first-order Peano axioms. This is a "first-order" theory: the quantifiers extend over natural numbers, but not over sets or functions of natural numbers. The theory is strong enough to describe recursively defined integer functions such as exponentiation, factorials or the Fibonacci sequence. Let N be the standard structure for L,, i.e. N consists of the ordinary set of natural numbers and their addition and multiplication. Each sentence in L can be interpreted in N and then becomes either true or false. Thus (L,N)(L,N) is the "interpreted first-order language of arithmetic". Each formula φφ in L has a Gödel number g(φ).(φ). This is a natural number that "encodes" φ.φ. In that way, the language L can talk about formulas in L,, not just about numbers. Let T denote the set of L-sentences true in N,, and T∗^* the set of Gödel numbers of the sentences in T.. The following theorem answers the question: Can T∗^* be defined by a formula of first-order arithmetic? Tarski's undefinability theorem: There is no L-formula True(n)(n) that defines T∗.^*. That is, there is no L-formula True(n)(n) such that for every L-sentence A,, True(g(A))⟺A(g(A)) holds in N.. Informally, the theorem says that the concept of truth of first-order arithmetic statements cannot be defined by a formula in first-order arithmetic. This implies a major limitation on the scope of "self-representation". It is possible to define a formula True(n)(n) whose extension is T∗,^*, but only by drawing on a metalanguage whose expressive power goes beyond that of L.. For example, a truth predicate for first-order arithmetic can be defined in second-order arithmetic. However, this formula would only be able to define a truth predicate for formulas in the original language L.. To define a truth predicate for the metalanguage would require a still higher metametalanguage, and so on. To prove the theorem, we proceed by contradiction and assume that an L-formula True(n)(n) exists which is true for the natural number n in N if and only if n is the Gödel number of a sentence in L that is true in N.. We could then use True(n)(n) to define a new L-formula S(m)(m) which is true for the natural number m if and only if m is the Gödel number of a formula φ(x)φ(x) (with a free variable x) such that φ(m)φ(m) is false when interpreted in N (i.e. the formula φ(x),φ(x), when applied to its own Gödel number, yields a false statement). If we now consider the Gödel number g of the formula S(m),(m), and ask whether the sentence S(g)(g) is true in N,, we obtain a contradiction. (This is known as a diagonal argument.) The theorem is a corollary of Post's theorem about the arithmetical hierarchy, proved some years after Tarski (1933). A semantic proof of Tarski's theorem from Post's theorem is obtained by reductio ad absurdum as follows. Assuming T∗^* is arithmetically definable, there is a natural number n such that T∗^* is definable by a formula at level Σn0Σ_n^0 of the arithmetical hierarchy. However, T∗^* is Σk0Σ_k^0-hard for all k.. Thus the arithmetical hierarchy collapses at level n,, contradicting Post's theorem. General