out: In Step 3, the sphere was partitioned into orbits of our group H. To streamline the proof, the discussion of points that are fixed by some rotation was omitted; since the paradoxical decomposition of F2 relies on shifting certain subsets, the fact that some points are fixed might cause some trouble. Since any rotation of S2 (other than the null rotation) has exactly two fixed points, and since H, which is isomorphic to F2, is countable, there are countably many points of S2 that are fixed by some rotation in H. Denote this set of fixed points as D. Step 3 proves that S2 − D admits a paradoxical decomposition. What remains to be shown is the Claim: S2 − D is equidecomposable with S2. Proof. Let λ be some line through the origin that does not intersect any point in D. This is possible since D is countable. Let J be the set of angles, α, such that for some natural number n, and some P in D, r(nα)P is also in D, where r(nα) is a rotation about λ of nα. Then J is countable. So there exists an angle θ not in J. Let ρ be the rotation about λ by θ. Then ρ acts on S2 with no fixed points in D, i.e., ρn(D) is disjoint from D, and for natural m<n, ρn(D) is disjoint from ρm(D). Let E be the disjoint union of ρn(D) over n = 0, 1, 2, ... . Then S2 = E ∪ (S2 − E) ~ ρ(E) ∪ (S2 − E) = (E − D) ∪ (S2 − E) = S2 − D, where ~ denotes "is equidecomposable to". For step 4, it has already been shown that the ball minus a point admits a paradoxical decomposition; it remains to be shown that the ball minus a point is equidecomposable with the ball. Consider a circle within the ball, containing the point at the center of the ball. Using an argument like that used to prove the Claim, one can see that the full circle is equidecomposable with the circle minus the point at the ball's center. (Basically, a countable set of points on the circle can be rotated to give itself plus one more point.) Note that this involves the rotation about a point other than the origin, so the Banach–Tarski paradox involves isometries of Euclidean 3-space rather than just SO(3). Use is made of the fact that if A ~ B and B ~ C, then A ~ C. The decomposition of A into C can be done using number of pieces equal to the product of the numbers needed for taking A into B and for taking B into C. The proof sketched above requires 2 × 4 × 2 + 8 = 24 pieces - a factor of 2 to remove fixed points, a factor 4 from step 1, a factor 2 to recreate fixed points, and 8 for the center point of the second ball. But in step 1 when moving {e} and all strings of the form an into S(a−1), do this to all orbits except one. Move {e} of this last orbit to the center point of the second ball. This brings the total down to 16 + 1 pieces. With more algebra, one can also decompose fixed orbits into 4 sets as in step 1. This gives 5 pieces and is the best possible. Obtaining infinitely many balls from