treatment: The Banach–Tarski paradox states that a ball in the ordinary Euclidean space can be doubled using only the operations of partitioning into subsets, replacing a set with a congruent set, and reassembling. Its mathematical structure is greatly elucidated by emphasizing the role played by the group of Euclidean motions and introducing the notions of equidecomposable sets and a paradoxical set. Suppose that G is a group acting on a set X. In the most important special case, X is an n-dimensional Euclidean space (for integral n), and G consists of all isometries of X, i.e. the transformations of X into itself that preserve the distances, usually denoted E(n). Two geometric figures that can be transformed into each other are called congruent, and this terminology will be extended to the general G-action. Two subsets A and B of X are called G-equidecomposable, or equidecomposable with respect to G, if A and B can be partitioned into the same finite number of respectively G-congruent pieces. This defines an equivalence relation among all subsets of X. Formally, if there exist non-empty sets A1,…,Ak_1,…,A_k, B1,…,Bk_1,…,B_k such that A=⋃i=1kAi,B=⋃i=1kBi,=⋃_i=1^kA_i,=⋃_i=1^kB_i, Ai∩Aj=Bi∩Bj=∅forall1≤i<j≤k,_i_j=B_i_j=∅ forall1<j, and there exist elements gi∈G_i such that gi(Ai)=Biforall1≤i≤k,_i(A_i)=B_iforall1, then it can be said that A and B are G-equidecomposable using k pieces. If a set E has two disjoint subsets A and B such that A and E, as well as B and E, are G-equidecomposable, then E is called paradoxical. Using this terminology, the Banach–Tarski paradox can be reformulated as follows: A three-dimensional Euclidean ball is equidecomposable with two copies of itself. In fact, there is a sharp result in this case, due to Raphael M. Robinson:[7] doubling the ball can be accomplished with five pieces, and fewer than five pieces will not suffice. The strong version of the paradox claims: Any two bounded subsets of 3-dimensional Euclidean space with non-empty interiors are equidecomposable. While apparently more general, this statement is derived in a simple way from the doubling of a ball by using a generalization of the Bernstein–Schroeder theorem due to Banach that implies that if A is equidecomposable with a subset of B and B is equidecomposable with a subset of A, then A and B are equidecomposable. The Banach–Tarski paradox can be put in context by pointing out that for two sets in the strong form of the paradox, there is always a bijective function that can map the points in one shape into the other in a one-to-one fashion. In the language of Georg Cantor's set theory, these two sets have equal cardinality. Thus, if one enlarges the group to allow arbitrary bijections of X, then all sets with non-empty interior become congruent. Likewise, one ball can be made into a larger or smaller ball by stretching, or in other words, by applying similarity transformations. Hence, if the group G is large enough, G-equidecomposable sets may be found whose "size"s vary. Moreover, since a countable set can be made into two copies of itself, one might expect that using countably many pieces could somehow do the trick. On the other hand, in the Banach–Tarski paradox, the number of pieces is finite and the allowed equivalences are Euclidean congruences, which preserve the volumes. Yet, somehow, they end up doubling the volume of the ball! While this is certainly surprising, some of the pieces used in the paradoxical decomposition are non-measurable sets, so the notion of volume (more precisely, Lebesgue measure) is not defined for them, and the partitioning cannot be accomplished in a practical way. In fact, the Banach–Tarski paradox demonstrates that it is impossible to find a finitely-additive measure (or a Banach measure) defined on all subsets of a Euclidean space of three (and greater) dimensions that is invariant with respect to Euclidean motions and takes the value one on a unit cube. In his later work, Tarski showed that, conversely, non-existence of paradoxical decompositions of this type implies the existence of a finitely-additive invariant measure. The heart of the proof of the "doubling the ball" form of the paradox presented below is the remarkable fact that by a Euclidean isometry (and renaming of elements), one can divide a certain set (essentially, the surface of a unit sphere) into four parts, then rotate one of them to become itself plus two of the other parts. This follows rather easily from a F2-paradoxical decomposition of F2, the free group with two generators. Banach and Tarski's proof relied on an analogous fact discovered by Hausdorff some years earlier: the surface of a unit sphere in space is a disjoint union of three sets B, C, D and a countable set E such that, on the one hand, B, C, D are pairwise congruent, and on the other hand, B is congruent with the union of C and D. This is often called the Hausdorff paradox. Connection with earlier work and the role of the axiom of