proof: To prove the perfect graph theorem, Lovász used an operation of replacing vertices in a graph by cliques; it was already known to Berge that, if a graph is perfect, the graph formed by this replacement process is also perfect.[4] Any such replacement process may be broken down into repeated steps of doubling a vertex. If the doubled vertex belongs to a maximum clique of the graph, it increases both the clique number and the chromatic number by one. If, on the other hand, the doubled vertex does not belong to a maximum clique, form a graph H by removing the vertices with the same color as the doubled vertex (but not the doubled vertex itself) from an optimal coloring of the given graph. The removed vertices meet every maximum clique, so H has clique number and chromatic number one less than that of the given graph. The removed vertices and the new copy of the doubled vertex can then be added back as a single color class, showing that in this case the doubling step leaves the chromatic number unchanged. The same argument shows that doubling preserves the equality of the clique number and the chromatic number in every induced subgraph of the given graph, so each doubling step preserves the perfection of the graph.[5] Given a perfect graph G, Lovász forms a graph G* by replacing each vertex v by a clique of tv vertices, where tv is the number of distinct maximum independent sets in G that contain v. It is possible to correspond each of the distinct maximum independent sets in G with one of the maximum independent sets in G*, in such a way that the chosen maximum independent sets in G* are all disjoint and each vertex of G* appears in a single chosen set; that is, G* has a coloring in which each color class is a maximum independent set. Necessarily, this coloring is an optimal coloring of G*. Because G is perfect, so is G*, and therefore it has a maximum clique K* whose size equals the number of colors in this coloring, which is the number of distinct maximum independent sets in G; necessarily, K* contains a distinct representative for each of these maximum independent sets. The corresponding set K of vertices in G (the vertices whose expanded cliques in G* intersect K*) is a clique in G with the property that it intersects every maximum independent set in G. Therefore, the graph formed from G by removing K has clique cover number at most one less than the clique number of G, and independence number at least one less than the independence number of G, and the result follows by induction on this number.[6] Relation to the strong perfect graph