notions: A Riemann surface of genus 3. A Riemann surface X is a topological space that is locally homeomorphic to an open subset of Cℂ, the set of complex numbers. In addition, the transition maps between these open subsets are required to be holomorphic. The latter condition allows one to transfer the notions and methods of complex analysis dealing with holomorphic and meromorphic functions on Cℂ to the surface X. For the purposes of the Riemann–Roch theorem, the surface X is always assumed to be compact. Colloquially speaking, the genus g of a Riemann surface is its number of handles; for example the genus of the Riemann surface shown at the right is three. More precisely, the genus is defined as half of the first Betti number, i.e., half of the Cℂ-dimension of the first singular homology group H1(X,C)_1(X,ℂ) with complex coefficients. The genus classifies compact Riemann surfaces up to homeomorphism, i.e., two such surfaces are homeomorphic if and only if their genus is the same. Therefore, the genus is an important topological invariant of a Riemann surface. On the other hand, Hodge theory shows that the genus coincides with the Cℂ-dimension of the space of holomorphic one-forms on X, so the genus also encodes complex-analytic information about the Riemann surface.[1] A divisor D is an element of the free abelian group on the points of the surface. Equivalently, a divisor is a finite linear combination of points of the surface with integer coefficients. Any meromorphic function f gives rise to a divisor denoted (f)(f) defined as (f):=∑zν∈R(f)sνzν(f):=∑_z_ν(f)s_νz_ν where R(f)(f) is the set of all zeroes and poles of f, and sν_ν is given by sν:=aifzνisazeroofordera−aifzνisapoleofordera._ν:=a ifz_νisazeroofordera -a ifz_νisapoleofordera. The set R(f)(f) is known to be finite; this is a consequence of X being compact and the fact that the zeros of a (non-zero) holomorphic function do not have an accumulation point. Therefore, (f)(f) is well-defined. Any divisor of this form is called a principal divisor. Two divisors that differ by a principal divisor are called linearly equivalent. The divisor of a meromorphic 1-form is defined similarly. A divisor of a global meromorphic 1-form is called the canonical divisor (usually denoted K). Any two meromorphic 1-forms will yield linearly equivalent divisors, so the canonical divisor is uniquely determined up to linear equivalence (hence "the" canonical divisor). The symbol deg⁡(D)(D) denotes the degree (occasionally also called index) of the divisor D, i.e. the sum of the coefficients occurring in D. It can be shown that the divisor of a global meromorphic function always has degree 0, so the degree of a divisor depends only on its linear equivalence class. The number ℓ(D)ℓ(D) is the quantity that is of primary interest: the dimension (over Cℂ) of the vector space of meromorphic functions h on the surface, such that all the coefficients of (h)+D(h)+D are non-negative. Intuitively, we can think of this as being all meromorphic functions whose poles at every point are no worse than the corresponding coefficient in D; if the coefficient in D at z is negative, then we require that h has a zero of at least that multiplicity at z – if the coefficient in D is positive, h can have a pole of at most that order. The vector spaces for linearly equivalent divisors are naturally isomorphic through multiplication with the global meromorphic function (which is well-defined up to a scalar). Statement of the