matrices: Let A be a n × n square matrix over field F. The matrix A is irreducible if any of the following equivalent properties holds. Definition 1 : A does not have non-trivial invariant coordinate subspaces. Here a non-trivial coordinate subspace means a linear subspace spanned by any proper subset of standard basis vectors of Fn. More explicitly, for any linear subspace spanned by standard basis vectors ei1 , ..., eik, 0 < k < n its image under the action of A is not contained in the same subspace. Definition 2: A cannot be conjugated into block upper triangular form by a permutation matrix P: PAP−1≠(EFOG),^-1≠[ E F; O G ], where E and G are non-trivial (i.e. of size greater than zero) square matrices. Definition 3: One can associate with a matrix A a certain directed graph GA. It has n vertices labeled 1,...,n, and there is an edge from vertex i to vertex j precisely when aij ≠ 0. Then the matrix A is irreducible if and only if its associated graph GA is strongly connected. If F is the field of real or complex numbers, then we also have the following condition. Definition 4: The group representation of (R,+)(ℝ,+) on Rnℝ^n or (C,+)(ℂ,+) on Cnℂ^n given by t↦exp⁡(tA)↦exp(tA) has no non-trivial invariant coordinate subspaces. (By comparison, this would be an irreducible representation if there were no non-trivial invariant subspaces at all, not only considering coordinate subspaces.) A matrix is reducible if it is not irreducible. A real matrix A is primitive if it is non-negative and its mth power is positive for some natural number m (i.e. all entries of Am are positive). Let A be real and non-negative. Fix an index i and define the period of index i to be the greatest common divisor of all natural numbers m such that (Am)ii > 0. When A is irreducible, the period of every index is the same and is called the period of A. In fact, when A is irreducible, the period can be defined as the greatest common divisor of the lengths of the closed directed paths in GA (see Kitchens[15] page 16). The period is also called the index of imprimitivity (Meyer[12] page 674) or the order of cyclicity. If the period is 1, A is aperiodic. It can be proved that primitive matrices are the same as irreducible aperiodic non-negative matrices. All statements of the Perron–Frobenius theorem for positive matrices remain true for primitive matrices. The same statements also hold for a non-negative irreducible matrix, except that it may possess several eigenvalues whose absolute value is equal to its spectral radius, so the statements need to be correspondingly modified. In fact the number of such eigenvalues is equal to the period. Results for non-negative matrices were first obtained by Frobenius in 1912. Perron–Frobenius theorem for irreducible non-negative